VETERINARY PRACTICE GUIDELINES
2021 AAHA Nutrition and Weight Management
Guidelines for Dogs and Cats*
Martha G. Cline, DVM, DACVNy, Kara M. Burns, MS, MEd, LVT, VTS (Nutrition), Jason B. Coe, DVM, PhD,
Robin Downing, DVM, MS (Bioethics), DAAPM, DACVSMR, CVPP, CCRP, Tiffany Durzi, DVM, CVA, CCRT, CVPPx,
Maryanne Murphy, DVM, PhD, DACVN, Valerie Parker, DVM, DACVIM, DACVN
ABSTRACT
The guidelines discuss the components of a systematic approach to nutritional management of dogs and cats. A nutritional
assessment, including a body condition score and muscle condition score, is a screening evaluation that should ideally be
performed at every examination. Individualized nutritional recommendations, based on the nutritional assessment, should be
designed to achieve and maintain an appropriate body weight and meet nutritional requirements. Communicating nutritional
recommendations to clients is a challenging aspect of nutritional management because pet owners may interpret the
practice team’s guidance as advocacy for a particular pet food brand or a judgment of the client’s ability to properly
care for the pet or of the owner’s own nutritional status. The guidelines discuss approaches for effective, nonjudgmental
communication of dietary recommendations to clients and strategies to increase acceptance of and adherence to
veterinary nutrition recommendations. Other pet nutrition topics of current interest include recommendations for par-
ticular pet life stages, breeds, and disease conditions; risk factors for nutritional deﬁciencies and obesity; and consid-
erations for home-prepared diets. (J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2021; 57:153–178. DOI 10.5326/JAAHA-MS-7232)
AFFILIATIONS
From Red Bank Veterinary Hospital, Tinton Falls, New Jersey (M.G.C.); Academy
of Veterinary Nutrition Technicians, Lafayette, Indiana (K.M.B.); Department of
Population Medicine (J.B.C.) and Hill’s Pet Nutrition Primary Healthcare Centre
(T.D.), Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Can-
ada; The Downing Center for Animal Pain Management, LLC, Windsor, Colo-
rado (R.D.); Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences, University of
Tennessee College of Veterinary Medicine, Knoxville, Tennessee (M.M.); and
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, The Ohio State University, Colum-
bus, Ohio (V.P.).
CONTRIBUTING REVIEWERS
Angela Rollins, DVM, PhD, DACVN, Small Animal Clinical Sciences, University
of Tennessee College of Veterinary Medicine, Knoxville, Tennessee
Megan Shepherd, DVM, PhD, DACVN, Virginia-Maryland College of Veterinary
Medicine, Blacksburg, Virginia
Correspondence: marthagcline@gmail.com (M.G.C.)
* These guidelines are supported by generous educational grants from Hill’s
Pet Nutrition, Inc., Purina® Pro Plan® Veterinary Diets, and Royal Canin®.
They were subjected to a formal peer-review process.
† M. G. Cline is the chair of the AAHA Nutrition and Weight Management
Guidelines Task Force.
x T. Durzi is the representative for the Primary Care Veterinary Educators.
These guidelines were prepared by a Task Force of experts convened by
the American Animal Hospital Association (AAHA) and were subjected to a
formal peer-review process. This document is intended as a guideline only,
not an AAHA standard of care. These guidelines and recommendations
should not be construed as dictating an exclusive protocol, course of
treatment, or procedure. Variations in practice may be warranted based on
the needs of the individual patient, resources, and limitations unique to each
individual practice setting. Evidence-based support for speciﬁc recom-
mendations has been cited whenever possible and appropriate.
Other recommendations are based on practical clinical experience and
a consensus of expert opinion. Further research is needed to document
some of these recommendations. Because each case is different, veter-
inarians must base their decisions on the best available scientiﬁc evidence
in conjunction with their own knowledge and experience.
AAFCO (Association of American Feed Control Ofﬁcials); ACVN (American
College of Veterinary Nutrition); BCS (body condition score); BF% (body
fat percentage); BW (body weight); CKD (chronic kidney disease); DCM
(dilated cardiomyopathy); DEXA (dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry); DHF
(diet history form); HPP (high-pressure processing); MER (maintenance
energy requirement); MCS (muscle condition score); RER (resting en-
ergy requirement); WSAVA (World Small Animal Veterinary Association);
USDA (United States Department of Agriculture)
The AAHA website (aaha.org/nutrition) contains supporting information
and resources for practice teams.
JAAHA.ORG
153
Copyright © American Animal Hospital Association
Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association (JAAHAV
R ) using the CC BY-NC-ND license
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ may be shared according to the license with appropriate credit.
Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-07-12 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
Introduction
Nutritional management is a central component of a complete
healthcare plan for canine and feline patients and is integral to a pet’s
longevity and quality of life. The positive impact of proper nutrition
on health and morbidities such as chronic kidney disease (CKD),
diabetes mellitus, and osteoarthritis is well accepted. Thus, a nu-
tritional assessment of canine and feline patients should be per-
formed on a regular basis throughout all pet life stages, ideally at
each exam visit. With that goal in mind, the objectives of these
guidelines are to:
· Describe how to perform an individualized, breed-speciﬁc,
evidence-guided nutritional assessment for canine and feline
patients.
· Provide recommendations for diagnosis, treatment, and man-
agement of under- or overweight pets.
· Provide a comprehensive list of nutrients of concern for spe-
ciﬁc health conditions.
· Offer suggestions on how to effectively communicate and ed-
ucate owners about nutritional recommendations, including
for weight control.
· Provide strategies to increase adherence to pet nutrition rec-
ommendations.
· Address several nutrition-related topics of current interest, in-
cluding raw and home-prepared diets, breed-speciﬁc nutrition,
and diet-associated dilated cardiomyopathy in dogs.
This report updates and complements previously published but
still relevant nutrition-related guidelines produced by the American
Animal Hospital Association. These include the 2010 AAHA Nu-
tritional Assessment Guidelines for Dogs and Cats and the 2014 AAHA
Weight Management Guidelines for Dogs and Cats.1,2 These prior
guidelines address two essential components of nutritional man-
agement: assessment and weight control. The 2021 AAHA Nutrition
and Weight Management Guidelines for Dogs and Cats include other
important topics necessary for a truly comprehensive approach to
dietary management in primary-care companion-animal practice.
These include step-by-step methods for performing a complete
nutritional assessment and preparing an individualized nutritional
plan as well as communication tips that promote optimal adherence
to the dietary recommendations.
Practitioners have minimal or no control over certain aspects of
pet health such as the patient’s genetics and home environment.
Nutrition, on the other hand, can be substantially inﬂuenced by the
veterinarian’s medical expertise and recommendations. Achieving
this positive effect requires a partnership between the veterinarian,
the practice team, and the pet-owner client. More so than many
other pet healthcare topics, discussing nutrition with clients can
include sensitive topics such as obesity, pet food choice, feeding
habits, and food rewards. For that reason, these guidelines include a
detailed discussion on communicating dietary recommendations to
clients in a trust-based, nondefensive manner.
Practice guidelines are consensus statements developed by ex-
perts with decades of clinical experience, both evidence guided and
anecdotal. These guidelines support the veterinary medical profes-
sion’s bioethical obligation to its patients and their owners by giving
clinicians the practical means to advocate for pets who cannot
represent themselves. Guidelines such as those contained in this
report enhance veterinarians’ expertise, which they can leverage on
behalf of their patients, thus honoring the principles of clinical
bioethics that are the basis of their client-patient relationships.
It is worth noting that individualized nutritional assessments
and dietary management require no specialized equipment and can
be implemented with little additional time expenditure or cost. Using
the approach described in these guidelines, practitioners and their
healthcare teams can ensure that nutrition becomes a foundation of
good health for their canine and feline patients.
How to Perform a Complete Nutritional Assessment
The ﬁve vital assessments of a standard physical exam for small
animals include temperature, pulse, respiration, pain, and nutritional
assessment.3 The World Small Animal Veterinary Association
(WSAVA) recommends nutrition as the ﬁfth vital assessment to
optimize the health and wellbeing of pets. The AAHA Advisory
Panel endorses this recommendation.
The nutritional assessment is an iterative process that requires
repeated assessment over the animal’s lifetime. The factors evaluated
included animal- and diet-speciﬁc factors and feeding management
(Figure 1). Animal-speciﬁc factors refer to the age, physiological
status, and activity of the pet. Diet-speciﬁc factors include the safety
and appropriateness of the diet for the speciﬁc patient. Feeding
management encompasses not only the frequency, timing, location,
and method of feeding but also the pet’s environment and human-
related factors. Speciﬁc problems related to each factor should be
identiﬁed and addressed individually (Table 1).
Screening Evaluation
There are two overarching components to a complete nutritional
assessment: a screening evaluation and an extended evaluation, if
needed. A nutritional assessment starts with a screening evaluation
followed by an extended evaluation if nutritional risk factors are
identiﬁed (Figure 2). A screening evaluation should be performed
on every pet at every visit. The elements of a screening nutritional
assessment are not time consuming and are performed as part of a
154
JAAHA
|
57:4
Jul/Aug 2021
Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-07-12 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
routine history and physical exam. The screening should include an
evaluation of nutritional history, environment, activity level, body
weight (BW), body condition score (BCS), and muscle condition
score (MCS), followed by a complete physical exam. If nutritional
risk factors are identiﬁed, an extended evaluation is recommended.
A nutritional history should include not only main meal items
but also treats, table food, supplements, and foods used for medi-
cation administration. The American College of Veterinary Nutri-
tion (ACVN) and the WSAVA publish sample diet history forms
(DHFs).4,5 Longer examples are also available.6 To improve nutri-
tional history accuracy, owners can be asked to complete the DHF at
home. Practice team members can then verify DHF information
that is incomplete or inaccurate.
BCS is a physical assessment of body fat mass.7,8 The 9-point
BCS scale is validated to correlated with body fat percentage (BF%)
using dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA).9,10 Every incre-
mental increase in BCS is equivalent to a 5% increase in BF% while
each BCS .5/9 is equivalent to being 10% overweight (Table 2).9–11
The authors suggest universal use of the 9-point (1–9) BCS scale with
whole integers for the standardization of medical records, consistency
of data collection and interpretation for research, and for consistent
communication from veterinary team members to pet owners.
MCS is a physical assessment of the patient’s muscle mass,
which includes visualization and palpation of the musculature over
the spine, scapulae, skull, and pelvis.12,13 The authors suggest a
narrative description of MCS that includes normal muscle mass or
mild, moderate, or severe muscle loss. The MCS has been signiﬁ-
cantly correlated with ultrasonographic measurements of the epaxial
musculature (cats and dogs) and DEXA (cats).14–17 The routine use
of MCS is important to identify patients with muscle loss related to
cachexia and sarcopenia (see terminology deﬁnitions in Table 3).
Both cachexia and sarcopenia can adversely affect outcomes in
veterinary patients.17 BCS and MCS are not causally related and
should be assessed separately (e.g., an animal may be overweight
with muscle loss). Underweight patients often have loss of both
body fat and muscle mass, yet BCS and MCS should still be scored
separately.
Although typically not included in the screening evaluation,
additional tools to be considered are the body fat index (BFI) and
girth assessments. BFI, like BCS, is a validated scale to correlate with
BF% in both the dog and cat.18,19 A BCS is limited in its assessment
of patients with a high BF% (.45%). The BFI system is a useful tool
in differentiating patients with a higher level of BF%. Morphometric
measurements to assess lean body mass and fat mass have been
established in the dog and cat. These measurements in addition to
BFI are useful for patients with a BCS $8/9.
Limb girth assessments, an objective measure of muscle mass
and strength, are an emerging area of investigation and may prove to
be valuable in speciﬁc patient populations or for speciﬁc patients. For
example, this could be a tool for an orthopedic patient enrolled in a
physical rehabilitation program.
A fecal score can be included in the screening assessment as a
useful tool to assess stool quality and characteristics.20,21 Various fecal
scoring systems have been proposed for veterinary patients.20,21 A
fecal scoring system used repeatedly in a practice can be useful for
consistent communication between the client and veterinary team
members and to follow trends in fecal quality.
Screening Assessment for Hospitalized Patients
A nutritional assessment should be performed on admission and at
least daily for hospitalized patients. Historical information should
establish the patient’s food preferences, unexplained weight change,
and recent appetite changes including anorexia, hyporexia, and
dysrexia (see terminology deﬁnitions in Table 3). The physical exam
should include an assessment of mentation, an examination for the
presence of ascites or edema, and an assessment of available diag-
nostics. BW needs to be checked at least daily to assess the hydration
status of the patient. Speciﬁc feeding orders including calculation of
resting energy requirement, speciﬁc food(s) to be offered, feeding
FIGURE 1
The Circle of Nutrition. Consider these interconnected variables during
nutritional assessment. Factors speciﬁc to the animal, the diet, and
feeding management/environment should be assessed. (Reprinted with
permission from the American College of Veterinary Nutrition.)
2021 AAHA Nutrition and Weight Management Guidelines
JAAHA.ORG
155
Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-07-12 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
amount (based on a percentage of resting energy requirement
[RER]), and frequency offered should be written and assessed daily.
Nutritional Risk Factors
The goal of the screening evaluation is to identify any nutritional risk
factors from the patient’s life stage, medical/dietary history, or
physical exam (Table 4). Once a nutritional risk factor(s) is iden-
tiﬁed, an extended nutritional assessment is recommended. Vul-
nerable life stages such as growth, gestation, lactation, and
advancing age alter the patient’s energy and nutrient requirements.
Previous or chronic medical conditions may have key nutritional
factors to address when making new recommendations. Owners
may use foods to administer medications or supplements, and di-
etary supplements may be a signiﬁcant source of calories. Non-
complete or unbalanced food calories at .10% of a patient’s daily
caloric intake dilute essential nutrients and provide excess calories.
Unconventional diets should be assessed for nutritional adequacy
and safety. Inadequate or inappropriate housing can contribute to
stress or barriers that may cause changes in food intake.
A BCS ,4/9 or .5/9, MCS with any degree of loss, and un-
explained weight change from the pet’s previous assessment should
prompt an extended assessment. Dental abnormalities or disease
may impact food intake, leading to anorexia, hyporexia, or dysrexia.
Poor skin or hair coat quality may indicate nutrition-related ab-
normalities. New medical conditions or diseases may beneﬁt from
speciﬁc nutritional interventions (Table 8).
Extended Evaluation
An extended nutritional assessment is an opportunity to gather a
more comprehensive nutritional history and pursue clinical diag-
nostics (Table 5). The speciﬁcs of an extended assessment will de-
pend on abnormal physical exam ﬁndings, the information obtained
through the screening nutritional history, and identiﬁcation of
speciﬁc nutritional risk factors. The development of nutritional
recommendations provides an opportunity for the skills of the en-
tire veterinary team to be utilized.
How to Create Individualized
Nutritional Recommendations
Feeding Plans for Healthy, Appropriate-Weight Cats and Dogs
For apparently healthy patients maintaining ideal weight, major diet
adjustments are likely not required unless a nutritional risk factor is
identiﬁed. When making new feeding recommendations, the fol-
lowing factors should be considered:
· Give speciﬁc feeding plans, including the new diet, feeding
amount, feeding frequency, recommended daily treat-snack-
table food-medication food allowance, and supplement adjustments.
· Diet adjustments over a 4- to 7-day period may reduce the
occurrence of negative gastrointestinal responses.
· Even with no physically apparent dietary issues, this is the
opportunity to help the owner lay a better nutritional founda-
tion for later in life. Teach owners how to assess BCS and MCS
so they can recognize an undesirable change and adjust intake
TABLE 1
Problems and Management for Animal-Speciﬁc, Diet-Speciﬁc, and Feeding Management Factors
156
JAAHA
|
57:4
Jul/Aug 2021
Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-07-12 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
as needed. Owner assessment of these parameters should be
veriﬁed by a member of the veterinary team.
· Discuss feeding management and other environmental factors (e.g.,
free-choice feeding, food competition/social hierarchy, outdoor ac-
cess leading to additional calories from predation, feces, etc.) that
may negatively inﬂuence their ability to adhere to the feeding plan.
· Food-dispensing toys or automated feeders are useful to con-
trol food access and amount. Feeding toys may positively affect
activity level in dogs, although the beneﬁt in cats is more re-
lated to enrichment and behavior modiﬁcation.22–25
When a cat or dog is healthy and maintains an appropriate weight,
ensure the pet is being fed a complete and balanced diet in a suitable
amount to avoid future unintended consequences. Although main-
tenance of ideal BW and BCS is the indicator for how well current
intake meets energy needs, these parameters do not address the dis-
tribution of calories from unbalanced food items. The Association of
American Feed Control Ofﬁcials (AAFCO) nutritional adequacy
statement indicates whether a commercial diet contains all the required
nutrients in the correct ratios (i.e., “complete and balanced”) for long-
term feeding to the speciﬁed life stage. Some foods, including many
therapeutic diets, have an “intermittent or supplemental” use label
indicating they do not meet the requirements of being “complete and
balanced” or that the diet has a special nutritional or dietary purpose.
Treats, snacks, and supplements do not require a nutritional adequacy
statement.26 If product packaging is not available, the company’s
customer service line or website may provide the information.
Assessing the overall quality of a commercial diet is challenging.
Speciﬁc questions to consider asking pet food companies and their
responses to a few of these questions have been published.27,28 The
FDA also publishes searchable recall and withdrawal information,
based on brand and reason for recall.29
To determine if caloric intake is suitable, calculate RER and
maintenance energy requirement (MER) based on the pet’s activity
and life stage factor guidelines (Box 1).
FIGURE 2
Nutritional assessment screening evaluation.
2021 AAHA Nutrition and Weight Management Guidelines
JAAHA.ORG
157
Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-07-12 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
1. Calculate current caloric intake from all food items. AAFCO
requires calorie content on dog and cat food labels, including
snacks and treats; however, this does not include chews, bones,
or toys.30 The United States Department of Agriculture (USDA)
FoodData Central system provides caloric content of whole foods.31
The caloric content of supplements may be listed on the label or
obtained by contacting the manufacturer.
2. Compare MER with total caloric intake. Ensure the calories con-
sumed are within a reasonable level of agreement to MER and that the
main source of complete and balanced nutrition represents $90% of
total intake whereas treats and other food items make up #10%.
3. If there is a signiﬁcant difference between calculated MER
and reported intake level, review calorie intake, life stage, activ-
ity level, and MER/RER calculation accuracy.
4. Consider an extended nutritional assessment, especially in
overweight or underweight pets (see preceding section on
How to Perform a Nutritional Assessment).
Commercial pet foods are required to contain feeding rec-
ommendations. In an ideal world, the pet owner will perform RER/
MER calculations rather than relying solely on package guidelines
because AAFCO does not standardize this process. However, many
owners will feed a commercial pet food according to the label di-
rections. In such cases, it is important for the practice team to assess
the dog’s or cat’s bodyweight, BCS, and MCS on a regular basis to
ensure that the patient is receiving optimal calories and protein.
Feeding Plans for Hospitalized Patients
For hospitalized patients, base feeding calculations on current weight
if ideal or underweight or on ideal BW if overweight or obese in order
to provide energy to current lean mass. Support anorexic or
hyporexic patients by speciﬁc feeding techniques (e.g., various forms
of food, heating meals, remove E-collars, separate food from litter
boxes and pee pads). For animals in whom there are no contrain-
dications, high-fat diets tend to have an increased caloric density,
minimizing the total food consumption volume needed to meet
energy requirements. Consider medication support, including ap-
petite stimulants, antiemetics, and prokinetics. If feeding techniques
and medications do not improve total voluntary intake, assisted
FIGURE 3
Components of a comprehensive
nutrition history.
158
JAAHA
|
57:4
Jul/Aug 2021
Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-07-12 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
feeding via enteral tubes (e.g., nasal, esophageal, gastric) is strongly
recommended within 72 hr of consumption of #1/3 RER including
the time before hospitalization. Because of the risk of food aversion
and aspiration, oral syringe feeding is no longer recommended.
Feeding protocols should promote the delivery of enteral nutrition
over parenteral nutrition when assisted nutrition support is needed.
Parenteral nutrition is reserved for select cases, generally in referral
facilities with 24-hr care.
Prevention of Obesity
Prevention of overweight and obesity aid the patient’s overall quality
of life and may contribute to a lengthened life span.19,21,32–34 It is
easier to prevent weight gain than it is to treat obesity, adding to the
advantages of prevention.35,36 Obesity discussions can be challeng-
ing, as there may be a perception that recommendations are a
judgment of the owner’s ability to properly care for their pet or a
judgment of the owner’s own body composition. It is best to enter
these conversations with compassion and sensitivity, while also
remaining a steadfast advocate for the pet’s wellbeing (see section on
Communicating with Clients).
Obesity comorbidities include osteoarthritis and endocrine diseases
(e.g., hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, hyperadrenocorticism).37–40 In
some cases (e.g., feline diabetes mellitus), preventing obesity may help
reduce the risk of developing the comorbidity, whereas in others (e.g.,
hypothyroidism), the underlying condition will continue to predispose
to obesity development unless adequately managed.
In order to successfully prevent obesity, an approach including
risk factor assessment and mitigation is recommended. Obesity risk
factors stem from both human-related and animal-related roots
(Table 6). A main human factor is the ability to overfeed the pri-
mary diet, and owners ﬁnd it difﬁcult to make subsequent adjust-
ments. Animals may also overeat if they have access to another pet’s
food bowl. Compare reported intake against calculated require-
ments based on ideal BW and make downward recommendations
accordingly. Reassess and adjust recommendations as needed at each
subsequent visit.
Owners also have the ability to overfeed food items that are not
the primary diet and overestimate their pet’s activity level.41 Advise
owners to maintain all additional item intake to #10% total daily
caloric intake to avoid disrupting nutrient balance of the primary
diet. To increase exercise in cats, consider the use of feather toys, cat
trees, exercise wheels, or similar devices. Fitness trackers may in-
crease owner motivation to increase their dog’s physical activity.42
Animal factors must also be considered to effectively prevent
obesity (Table 6). Energy requirements are reduced after spaying or
neutering, necessitating intake reduction.43–45 Certain breeds (e.g.,
Labrador retrievers, beagles, Norwegian forest cats, Persians) are
predisposed to weight gain and the owner should be educated re-
garding obesity risk, even if their pet currently has an ideal BCS.46,47
Increase in BW through middle age contributes to the preva-
lence of obesity.46–48 Energy requirements are thought to decrease
through middle age in the dog, which contributes to this weight
gain,49,50 although results are not consistent.51 Metabolic rates in the
dog can also be inﬂuenced by breed and their respective life ex-
pectancy.52 During senior and geriatric life stages, loss of lean body
mass and overall weight loss can occur.53 In cats, fat, protein, and
energy digestibility can decrease with advanced aging.54,55 Energy
intake can be higher for senior cats to compensate for this decrease
in digestibility.56 An important aspect of obesity prevention and
maintenance of ideal BCS and MCS is incorporating the entire
practice team in client education. Appropriate training is essential to
ensure that the team speaks with a common voice (see section on
Leveraging the Value of Proper Nutrition in Your Practice).
Weight Reduction in the Obese Pet
In 2014, AAHA published comprehensive weight management
guidelines, including a detailed protocol for safe weight reduction.2
Because weight loss is a critical aspect of nutritional management
for many pets, the 2021 Nutrition and Weight Management
Guidelines include an abbreviated overview of this topic. We en-
courage readers to consult the 2014 Weight Management Guidelines
for more complete information on this essential aspect of nutri-
tional management.
TABLE 2
Summary of BCS Scales and Their Relationship with BF and BW
2021 AAHA Nutrition and Weight Management Guidelines
JAAHA.ORG
159
Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-07-12 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
Once an animal has gained excess weight, the veterinary team
must appropriately inform the owner, gauge their willingness to
institute a weight loss program, and offer guidance and support for
the duration of the program. The overall design process is reviewed in
the 2014 Weight Management Guidelines. Traditional methods to
calculate caloric needs are included. Recent data suggest mean caloric
intake for weight loss over a 12 wk period is 63 6 10.2 kcal/kg0.75 in
dogs and 52 6 4.9 kcal/kg0.711 in cats.57,58 The same principles re-
garding feeding plans for healthy, appropriate-weight cats and dogs
apply for weight loss plans. The major difference is adjusting MER
calculations to account for necessary reduced calorie intake to in-
duce weight loss (Box 1). Base these calculations on ideal weight and
adjust as needed for the individual patient, based on current intake
and lifestyle needs.
Although the correct calculations are necessary for a successful
weight management program, feeding management and activity
plans are essential parts of the package. Puzzle toys and automated
feeders continue to be invaluable resources that may be especially
useful to achieve successful weight loss via improved ease of plan
implementation by owners.59,60 Consider collaborating with or re-
ferring to a veterinary rehabilitation practitioner (Table 7) to design
a comprehensive exercise plan to address desired weight loss while
maintaining muscle mass based on the pet’s current level of physical
ﬁtness. Use the 2014 Weight Management Guidelines for things to
consider with an activity plan.
Long-term monitoring and maintenance are often the most
difﬁcult aspects of a weight loss program. Failure to achieve and
maintain weight loss is common, and owner nonadherence is a
major factor.61–63 After starting a weight loss program, reach out to
the owner within the ﬁrst couple days to determine if there are any
immediate concerns. This can be done via phone or email and may
help maintain owner adherence and reduce the risk of subsequent
dropout.64 Because owners often have a strong human-animal
bond with their pets, these ﬁrst few days may pose the largest
obstacle as the owner reconciles a “new normal” that does not
involve a constant show of love and affection via provision of food
items. Weight management plans should address increasing non–
food-related interactions (e.g., walks, playtime, brushing). Post-
appointment contact can be used to reinforce these recommen-
dations with owners who are struggling with their commitment to
the feeding restriction aspect of the plan. The 2014 Weight Man-
agement Guidelines outline monitoring and maintenance op-
tions.2 The goal is to be an advocate for both the pet and the
owner, while maintaining a nonjudgmental style of communication
(see section on Communicating with Clients).
Use of Therapeutic Diets Designed to Promote Weight Loss
Therapeutic weight loss diets are recommended for patients un-
dergoing signiﬁcant calorie restriction (less than or equal to RER) for
weight loss. These diets are fortiﬁed in nutrients to avoid potential
nutrient deﬁciencies associated with caloric restriction. High-protein
diets can spare lean mass with calorie restriction during weight
loss.65,66 Protein and added ﬁber can promote a satiety effect.37,67
Added ﬁber to a therapeutic diet will also reduce caloric density.
High-moisture diets for cats may increase satiety and help promote
weight loss.68
FIGURE 4
A general framework for communi-
cating a nutrition-related healthcare
recommendation.
160
JAAHA
|
57:4
Jul/Aug 2021
Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-07-12 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
Use of Therapeutic Diets Not Related to Weight Loss
When the nutritional assessment indicates a patient may beneﬁt from
consuming a purpose-formulated therapeutic diet, the clinician
needs to focus on speciﬁc nutrients of concern (Table 8). When a
patient has a single disease condition and no additional nuanced
feeding or diet requirements, it may be adequate to simply choose a
therapeutic diet designed for the disease. In diseases in which di-
agnostics and staging affect nutrients of concern (e.g., CKD) or
when patients have multiple disease conditions and/or additional
feeding or diet requirements, consider all nutrients of concern be-
fore selecting a diet. Otherwise, it is easy to overlook a nutrient of
concern and inhibit or negate the treatment plan for the patient’s
condition. For example, if a dog receiving a low-fat diet to manage
chronic pancreatitis is diagnosed with CKD, a dietary change to
address the CKD may result in recurrent pancreatitis symptoms if
both disease conditions are not considered.
Communicating with Clients
Communicating about a dog’s or cat’s nutrition can be a complex
topic for veterinary personnel and pet owners to navigate. Nutrition
conversations start with the recognition that there are three aspects
of communication to be considered.69 First is the content, the
medical or scientiﬁc knowledge that informs a complete and bal-
anced nutrition recommendation, which is outlined in the majority
of these guidelines. Second is the process, the approach used to
engage a client in discussion about their dog’s or cat’s nutrition,
which is presented throughout this section. Third is the perceptual
aspect of communication—how the client thinks and feels about pet
nutrition—which represents the assumptions, beliefs, goals, and
thought process a person brings to a nutrition conversation. Al-
though we often focus on the content of communication, it is the
process and, even more often, the perceptions of staff and clients
that dictate whether a nutrition conversation is successful.
What we bring to a nutrition conversation in terms of our own
ideas, knowledge, and prior experiences is a critical starting point. This
involves recognizing and managing our own biases and perceptions
associated with pet nutrition in order to enter the conversation with an
open mind. When a client’s beliefs, goals, ideas, or perceptions are not
aligned with our viewpoint, the client is likely to reject our viewpoint
in favor of their own, regardless of the content we communicate.70
Nutrition conversations require a curiosity that allows us to be at-
tentive and responsive to understanding our client’s viewpoint. As a
result, successfully communicating a nutrition recommendation to a
client is heavily dependent upon understanding the client’s perspec-
tive. This is gained through conducting a comprehensive nutritional
history (Figure 3).
Gathering a Comprehensive Nutrition History
The nutrition history is the foundation of a nutrition recommen-
dation in which an intricate relationship exists between conducting a
nutrition history and making a relevant nutrition recommendation.
A comprehensive nutrition history requires exploring all animal-,
diet-, environment-, and human-related factors associated with a
dog’s or cat’s nutrition.
To gather a comprehensive nutrition history, whether using a
diet-history form or during an in-person interaction, veterinary
professionals should begin with open-ended questions or state-
ments that allow clients to share information unhindered by the
practice’s own goals or agenda. For example, phrases starting with
“Tell me . . .”, “Describe . . .”, or “Walk me through . . .” allow clients
to share information that the veterinary professional may not have
otherwise considered. Using open-ended inquiry during the initial
screening evaluation increases efﬁciency while also allowing for
greater detection of nutritional risk factors that can signal the need
for an extended nutrition evaluation. Veterinary personnel should
move from these broad exploratory lines of open-ended inquiry to
more focused lines of open-ended inquiry before using closed-ended
TABLE 3
Clinically Relevant Nutrition Terms
2021 AAHA Nutrition and Weight Management Guidelines
JAAHA.ORG
161
Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-07-12 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
TABLE 4
Nutritional Screening: Risk Factors as Determined by Life Stage, Medical/Dietary History, or Physical Exam
162
JAAHA
|
57:4
Jul/Aug 2021
Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-07-12 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
inquiry to gather speciﬁc details, that is, questions often answered with
one-word responses (Table 9).
When gathering information on diet-related factors, research
suggests that veterinary personnel should be cautious about starting
with simple what-prefaced questions (e.g., “What kind of food is
your pet on?”).71,72 Although a what-prefaced question is commonly
used by practice team members, when analyzing clients’ responses,
the question has been found to obtain limited diet information and
to encourage defensive responses from clients.73 In addition, treats
that a dog or cat may consume have been identiﬁed as a speciﬁc
component of the diet-related history that clients are less likely to
disclose,74,75 warranting more focused questioning or use of differ-
ent wording (e.g., snacks, rewards, extra foods) to avoid the threat
directly associated with the word “treat.”
Communicating a Nutrition Recommendation to the Client
A common obstacle that often undermines a veterinary professional’s
nutrition recommendation, when sufﬁcient nutrition history is not
gathered, is that the recommendation does not align with the client’s
own goals or beliefs. As part of the nutritional history, when asking
what the pet is being fed, we should also explore the client’s rationale
for feeding a speciﬁc food or brand. Exploring the client’s rationale for
feeding a speciﬁc food or brand gives the practice team an under-
standing of the pet owner’s dietary viewpoints and will help avoid
misunderstandings about the practice’s pet nutrition recommenda-
tions. In developing a nutrition recommendation, equal consideration
must be given to animal-, diet-, environment-, and human-related
factors. Similar to the nutritional assessment, developing a nutrition
recommendation is an iterative rather than linear process in which
returning to the nutrition history at any point may be required to
gather additional information to better align a nutrition recommen-
dation with the goals and beliefs of the client (Figure 4).
Another potential barrier to a veterinary professional’s nutrition
recommendation is the client’s suspicion of veterinary practices being
businesses that make healthcare recommendations.76 This skepticism
can be fueled when a nutrition recommendation involves a com-
mercial pet food. In this case, it is important to recognize that there
are two decisions for clients and, therefore, two separate recommen-
dations to be made. The ﬁrst recommendation is the nutrition-related
healthcare recommendation (a nutrition change to manage the health
of the animal preventively or to address a nutrition-related health
concern). The second recommendation, when required, is a product-
speciﬁc commercial diet to support the nutrition-related healthcare
decision. Separating these recommendations teases apart the question
of motivation (business versus healthcare) behind an overall nutrition
recommendation. Here is a step-by-step approach to making a nu-
trition recommendation to a client:
1. Initiating a Nutrition-Related Healthcare Recommendation
The ﬁrst step to a nutrition-related healthcare recommendation is
initiating the conversation with the client. This should involve some
form of forewarning to gauge the client’s receptivity to the con-
versation. Asking permission is one way of respectfully assessing a
client’s response to a topic (e.g., “Alex, I would like to spend some
time discussing Harley’s [diet, weight, snacks]. Would you be open
to this?"). Often, clients accept the invitation and you can move
directly into the nutrition conversation. Other times, the client
may show apprehension, providing an opportunity to open up the
conversation to develop a greater understanding of your client’s
apprehension. On occasion, a client will explicitly decline this
request, and nothing is lost because the client would likely not
have been responsive to moving forward otherwise. By asking
TABLE 5
Examples of Clinical Diagnostics for an Extended Nutritional
Assessment
2021 AAHA Nutrition and Weight Management Guidelines
JAAHA.ORG
163
Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-07-12 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
permission, you show respect, protect your relationship, and provide
an opportunity to engage with your client’s perspective, all of which
contribute to greater trust when pursuing a future conversation.
2. Explore with the Owner All Nutrition- and Non–Nutrition-
Related Options
Once a client is on board, you can explore all nutrition- and non–
nutrition-related healthcare options. Research indicates that 90% of
pet owners want to be made aware of all healthcare options, regardless
of cost.77 In contrast, a focus group study found that many veteri-
narians identiﬁed with presenting clients with only the option the
veterinarian believed to be best.78 Providing all the healthcare options
actively involves clients in the decision-making process and ac-
knowledges their autonomy. It also allows for developing greater
alignment with the goals and expectations of the client. As options are
presented to a client, it is not uncommon to need to return period-
ically to gathering more nutrition history to better align your rec-
ommendation.
3. Educate the Client About the Beneﬁts (and Risks) of Each
Nutrition Option
Critical to making any nutrition-related healthcare recommendation,
whether preventive or to address a speciﬁc disease, is educating the
client about the beneﬁts of each option (or lack thereof) to the health
and wellbeing of the pet (e.g., longer life, improved quality of life,
reduced onset of chronic disease, resolution or management of
a speciﬁc condition).79 Research suggests that veterinarians often
focus on features (e.g., a product, the time, or a service),80 without
explaining why an option may or may not provide value to the dog’s
or cat’s overall health and wellbeing.
TABLE 6
Obesity Risk Factors
164
JAAHA
|
57:4
Jul/Aug 2021
Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-07-12 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
4. Make a Clear Nutrition-Related Recommendation
Research in veterinary medicine examining clients’ adherence to
healthcare recommendations found that clients who were provided
with a clear recommendation were seven times more likely to adhere
than clients receiving an ambiguous recommendation.81 Once a
client is made aware of the available options and engaged in the
decision-making process, it is the veterinarian’s role to use their
knowledge to make a clear recommendation that takes into con-
sideration the nutritional assessment as well as the client’s goals.
5. Check in with the Client to Gain Feedback and Modify the
Recommendation
Following a recommendation, it is important to check in with the
client to see how the information was received before proceeding.
This approach allows the practice team member to return to gather
more nutrition history as needed or further tailor their recom-
mendation to better align with the goals of the client. Once the client
has arrived at a healthcare decision, if the decision requires a change
of diet involving a commercial pet food, it is at this point the vet-
erinary professional should move into a similar decision-making
process regarding a complete and balanced commercial pet food
(i.e., gather information, initiate the conversation, present options,
discuss the value of each option, make a clear recommendation,
check in with the client).
6. Plan Appropriate Follow-Up with the Client Once a Dietary
Change Has Been Implemented
Plan for a member of the veterinary team to follow up with the client
within a couple of days after a change to a dog’s or cat’s nutrition has
been made. This is a great time to answer any additional questions,
troubleshoot obstacles, or revisit the nutrition recommendation.
Managing Challenging Nutrition Conversations
It is important to acknowledge the plethora of potentially sensitive
topics that exist in relation to pet nutrition. An observational study
analyzing veterinarians’ conversations with pet owners about pet
TABLE 6
Continued
2021 AAHA Nutrition and Weight Management Guidelines
JAAHA.ORG
165
Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-07-12 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
TABLE 7
Additional Resources
166
JAAHA
|
57:4
Jul/Aug 2021
Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-07-12 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
nutrition identiﬁed evidence (reﬂected in verbal and nonverbal
cues) that patient weight, the timing of transition from one life-stage
diet to another, treats, wet versus dry foods, quality of the main
commercial food, and use of human foods were subjects about
which clients, veterinarians, or both demonstrated sensitivity.75
Other challenging nutrition conversations veterinary professionals
may encounter include discussing a client’s unconventional food
choices, preference for or disapproval of certain ingredients (e.g.,
grain, by-products), or use of various nutraceuticals or supplements.
Navigating these conversations requires being attentive and re-
sponsive to clients’ verbal and nonverbal cues that signal sensitivity
to a line of discussion. Many of these challenging conversations are
driven by a veterinarian’s or the practice team’s beliefs, goals, ideas,
or perceptions that do not align with the client’s own viewpoints. In
response to these challenges, it is important to be aware of our own
ideas, beliefs, and judgments. Acknowledging the client’s beliefs,
goals, ideas, or perceptions, which does not mean agreeing with
them, often provides an opportunity to further explore and un-
derstand the client’s perspective. This understanding can be used to
identify common ground, which can be used to bring differences in
perspective into greater alignment.
Intrateam Nutrition Communication
Engaging clients in conversation about pet nutrition is a perfect
veterinary-team sport, in which information is passed from one team
member to another as the entire team moves toward a common goal.
All team members who interact with clients should be equipped with
the skills needed to perform a comprehensive nutrition history and to
engage clients in a conversation about their pet’s nutrition. This
offers the practice team the opportunity to gather nutrition infor-
mation and share this information with other members of the
veterinary team who are positioned to develop a nutrition recom-
mendation. Involving your broader team in nutrition conversations
increases team engagement, boosts self-efﬁcacy, enhances efﬁciency,
and emphasizes to clients that the entire practice team is there and
available to support them.
How to Navigate the Emotional Connections Between
Pet Food Recommendations and People
A person’s personal food choices are complex and inﬂuenced by
biological, economical, physical, social, psychological,82 and envi-
ronmental determinants.75 Furthermore, attitudes, beliefs, and
knowledge about food also affect food choice. People may
BOX 1
Energy Requirement Calculations.111
2021 AAHA Nutrition and Weight Management Guidelines
JAAHA.ORG
167
Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-07-12 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
TABLE 8
Nutrients of Concern for Diseases and Select Speciﬁc Conditions
168
JAAHA
|
57:4
Jul/Aug 2021
Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-07-12 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
TABLE 8
Continued
2021 AAHA Nutrition and Weight Management Guidelines
JAAHA.ORG
169
Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-07-12 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
TABLE 8
Continued
170
JAAHA
|
57:4
Jul/Aug 2021
Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-07-12 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
TABLE 8
Continued
2021 AAHA Nutrition and Weight Management Guidelines
JAAHA.ORG
171
Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-07-12 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
anthropomorphize their own nutrition ideas to their pets.83 Across a
range of studies, common factors that inﬂuence pet food purchasing
decisions include the ingredients, quality, cost, company reputation,
veterinary recommendation, and ease of purchasing.75,78,84 Pet
owners and members of the veterinary team share a common in-
terest in the health and therapeutic beneﬁts of nutrition. It is ad-
vantageous for the veterinary team to understand a client’s
perspective before making nutritional recommendations.
Emotions such as hesitation, frustration, anxiety, and suspicion
of the pet owner may dominate conversations about pet nutrition.
Social media, marketing messages, and pet food recalls may reinforce
these emotions and support feelings of distrust. Clients may be
suspicious that nutrition recommendations by the veterinary team
are primarily inﬂuenced by ﬁnancial incentive rather than health
beneﬁts for their pet. Some clients may feel uncomfortable or in-
timidated discussing a topic in which they perceive a conﬂict may
exist, particularly with unconventional diet strategies. With regard to
the veterinary team, frustration may exist when clients bring up
preconceived notions about nutrition and the sources from which
they have gained these ideas.85
The veterinary team should focus on discussing nutrition in an
open, honest, and approachable manner, in which the client feels
comfortable and respected. Team members should identify the un-
derlying emotional reaction to these conversations, recognize the impact
of nonverbal cues, and listen to the client’s concerns.86 It is important to
understand that validating a client’s concern is different from agreeing
with the client. The goal is not to reinforce false information but to
validate concerns and come to a shared understanding.
The veterinary team must agree that there are different but
appropriate strategies to optimally feed pets. If the concerns about
unconventional diets are ignored, clients may turn to less reliable
sources for nutritional information.87 Although the beneﬁts of con-
ventional diets include nutritional adequacy and convenience, some
clients may be concerned or skeptical about processed foods.88 Pet
food manufacturers should provide transparency and details about
the contents, research, and beneﬁts of their diet. The veterinary team
can help build a trusting relationship by alerting clients about pet
food recalls and public health outbreaks if this is to happen.
Other Timely Nutrition Topics of Interest
Diet-Associated Dilated Cardiomyopathy
Dietary information is an evolving science. Although the Advisory Panel
has provided current information on nutritional topics of interest,
practitioners should make note of new developments that postdate these
guidelines. For example, there has been increased reporting of diet-
associated dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) in dogs in the last few
years.75,83,89 Previously identiﬁed risk factors include lamb and rice diets,
TABLE 9
Examples of Open-Ended and Close-Ended Inquiry
172
JAAHA
|
57:4
Jul/Aug 2021
Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-07-12 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
low-protein diets, and high-ﬁber diets.79 Certain breeds are predisposed
(e.g., golden retrievers, Newfoundlands, Irish wolfhounds).90–92 Recently,
more atypical dog breeds have been diagnosed with DCM. Some dogs
have been documented to have taurine deﬁciency and subsequent DCM,
whereas many of the dogs have had normal blood taurine concentra-
tions.75 Some common dietary features in these cases included feeding a
diet high in lentils or peas or feeding a grain-free diet.93,94
Research is currently being conducted to determine what is
contributing to diet-associated DCM in dogs. A few theories in-
clude:
1. Inclusion of ingredients that may negatively affect bioavail-
ability of amino acids and other essential nutrients.
2. Low caloric intake relative to calculated energy needs, con-
tributing to a relative decrease of nutrient ingestion.
3. A possible nutritional excess or toxicity.
4. A nonnutritional toxicity.
5. Additionally, as previously identiﬁed, there likely are some
breed-related factors at play.
The only way to deﬁnitively diagnose DCM is via an echo-
cardiogram, but this is an expensive test that may not be readily
available to all dog owners. If a dog is exhibiting clinical signs of heart
disease (e.g., new heart murmur, cardiac arrhythmia, exercise in-
tolerance), thoracic radiographs should be performed. If there is
suspicion for DCM or evidence of congestive heart failure, then an
echocardiogram should be performed.
Many dog owners want guidance on what they should (or
should not) be feeding their pets. Given currently available evidence,
the most conservative approach is to avoid feeding grain-free diets or
diets high in legumes. Because this is an evolving issue, pet owners
should carefully consider the pros and cons of feeding a speciﬁc type
of diet with their veterinarians. It is also incumbent upon veterinary
professionals to stay current in this area of research.
Home-Prepared Diets
Home-prepared diets may include cooked or raw foods. Multiple
veterinary studies of recipes found in books and on websites have
shown that the majority of these recipes, even those written by
veterinarians, do not provide complete and balanced nutrition.95–97
For pet owners who prefer to feed home-prepared diets, a consult
with a board-certiﬁed veterinary nutritionist is recommended. More
information about requesting nutrition consults can be found
online at the ACVN website (acvn.org/nutrition-consults/).
Once a recipe has been formulated and provided to the pet
owner, it is imperative that the owner follow the recipe exactly as
written to ensure that it provides complete and balanced nutrition.
This is especially important regarding speciﬁc vitamin, mineral,
and amino acid supplements to ensure that all micronutrient
requirements are met. It is common for owners to gradually amend
recipes over time,98 so practitioners should be conﬁrming at ap-
pointments that owners are still following speciﬁc instructions.
Supplements can also change over time, so home-prepared diet
recipes should be updated annually with a board-certiﬁed veteri-
nary nutritionist.
Raw Protein Diet
AAHA does not advocate or endorse feeding pets any raw or
dehydrated nonsterilized foods, including treats that are of animal
origin.99 Feeding a raw diet increases the risk of bacterial and pro-
tozoal pathogen transmission to the pets consuming the diet as well
as to people and other animals. Several studies have documented the
presence of pathogens in raw diets for pets and in the feces of dogs
and cats eating the raw diets.100,101 Importantly, dogs and cats can
shed Salmonella without exhibiting any clinical signs of dis-
ease.97,102,103
Some pet food companies use high-pressure processing (HPP)
to reduce bacterial numbers in their products. The efﬁcacy of HPP to
reduce bacterial numbers depends on several factors, including
bacterial species, number of HPP cycles performed, pH, pressure
achieved, processing time, and temperature.101 A pet food label claim
of HPP does not equate to “sterile” food.
Age-Speciﬁc and Breed-Speciﬁc Diets
Puppies and kittens should be fed diets appropriate for growth until
they reach skeletal maturity. For cats and small and medium-size
dogs, this typically means feeding a diet for growth until approxi-
mately 1 yr of age. For some large- and giant-breed dogs, skeletal
maturity may not be achieved until closer to 15–16 mo, and it is
important to support a giant-breed puppy’s growth accordingly,
aiming to maintain a lean BCS and avoiding excessive calcium in-
take.104,105
Energy requirements can vary as pets age, but there are no
speciﬁc nutritional requirements set by AAFCO for mature, senior, or
geriatric pets. Thus, pet owners and veterinarians should not feel
compelled to automatically change a pet’s diet once it reaches a
certain age. If an older dog or cat is doing well with its complete and
balanced adult maintenance diet, it is perfectly appropriate to
continue feeding that diet until a medical condition prompts oth-
erwise.
This becomes especially true when considering that there is no
consensus among different pet food manufacturers about what
should constitute a “senior” pet food. Signiﬁcant variability has been
documented among pet foods marketed for senior dogs.103,106 Al-
though certain companies have their own standards, this is not true
across the board. Thus, practitioners should use caution with the
2021 AAHA Nutrition and Weight Management Guidelines
JAAHA.ORG
173
Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-07-12 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
recommendation to feed any senior or mature diet to a cat with
CKD who will not readily accept a veterinary therapeutic renal diet.
This may result in unintentionally feeding excessive phosphorus to
the patient.
Some pet food companies market breed-speciﬁc diets. These
diets may be designed to accommodate certain breed predispositions
(e.g., a lower-calorie food for an overweight-prone dog breed) or the
kibble may be shaped in a way to help prehension. Ultimately,
nutritional recommendations should be made based on the indi-
vidual pet and the speciﬁc nutrient proﬁle of the diet.
Microbiome, Prebiotics, Postbiotics
The importance of a healthy gut microbiome has recently received
more attention in the veterinary community. There are many ways in
which the gut microbiome inﬂuences organ systems beyond the
gastrointestinal tract.107 There are several ways to qualify and
quantify an animal’s microbiome. Although the microbiome is
routinely evaluated in research settings, its clinical application is
currently limited.107 Pet owners and veterinary professionals should
be wary of companies advertising to test a pet’s microbiome, espe-
cially if supplements are then recommended.
An animal’s microbiome can be affected by diet, antibiotics,
probiotics, prebiotics, or fecal microbiome transplant. In many
cases, soft stool or diarrhea can be effectively managed with a diet
change, by modifying speciﬁc ingredients, dietary fat, or ﬁber in-
take.101 Using indiscriminate antibiotics for acute diarrhea is not
recommended.108 Caution should be exercised when choosing a
probiotic because there is variable quality control and efﬁcacy
among supplements.109,110
Opportunities and Resources to Leverage the Value of
Proper Nutrition in Your Practice
Proper nutrition is one of the most important factors in the
management of health and disease in pets. Veterinary healthcare
teams that understand and embrace clinical nutrition and dem-
onstrate in-clinic behaviors consistent with that conviction will
beneﬁt not only patients and clients but also their practice and the
profession.
Pet owners have access to vast information resources and are
subsequently becoming more educated and bringing detailed
questions to the healthcare team. This provides an excellent op-
portunity for the veterinary team to properly educate the client.
Integrating nutritional assessments into a practice requires com-
mitment and engagement of the entire veterinary team. This dedi-
cation and participation in developing a strong nutrition program
will promote success, optimal pet health, the client-pet relationship,
and a long-term client relationship with the practice. There are many
beneﬁts to implementing a team approach to the practice mission
and the veterinary team. The veterinary technician is poised to lead
the initiative to provide nutritional care for all patients. Group effort
increases efﬁciency by distributing workload and delivering an in-
tegrated cohesive message about the importance of nutrition and the
value of preventive care. When roles are delegated, everyone con-
tributes to success and individual motivation increases to accomplish
results.
A Team Approach
Providing optimal nutritional management to patients requires the
entire practice team with whom the client interacts. Using the entire
team increases morale, utilization, and revenue for the hospital. The
client service team should facilitate the completion of a diet history
form before the appointment. Veterinary technicians should assess
the patient’s BCS, BW, and MCS and take a history from the pet
owner including a nutritional history. This information should be
relayed to the veterinarian, who uses it along with further ques-
tioning, diagnostics, and the exam to make a nutritional recom-
mendation. To ensure client adherence, the recommendation is
supported and further explained to the client by the veterinary
technician or assistant. This explanation is an educational process
involving how the nutritional recommendation impacts the disease
process and in turn the health and wellbeing of a patient, and it
allows for questions from the client.
Once a nutrient proﬁle, portion, and feeding schedule have been
prescribed, the next steps toward success are follow-through by the
veterinary healthcare team and accountability. An easy-to-implement
program leverages the veterinary team to partner with the client to
position the pet toward optimal health.
In executing this approach, the client makes an appointment
(before leaving the practice) for a weigh-in and a body composition–
muscle composition assessment. A member of the practice team
follows up with the client by phone or email within the ﬁrst couple
of days. The client then returns for the subsequent visit, the pet is
weighed, and the BCS-MCS is assessed and recorded in the medical
record. The feeding plan is reviewed and veriﬁed with the client. The
target weight is reviewed, and the goal is adjusted if needed.
Questions from the client are encouraged and answered. Finally,
dietary portioning is adjusted if needed and the next assessment
appointment is scheduled.
There are multiple ways to ﬁne-tune an accountability program
to enhance its value to the client, to the veterinary healthcare team, to
the patient, and ultimately to the practice. Some nuances to consider
include:
· Pair each patient with a speciﬁc team member. This creates
continuity for the client, patient, and practice. It allows that
174
JAAHA
|
57:4
Jul/Aug 2021
Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-07-12 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
team member to note the trend of the pet’s progress toward
optimal body composition. The continuity of contact builds
trust with the client, potentially reduces fear for the patient,
and further bonds the client to the practice. This helps to set
the practice apart in a crowded marketplace and enhances
the role of the team member, allowing that person to con-
tribute to the success of the practice and the practice’s nu-
tritional goals.
· Set boundaries or “rules” for this assessment and accountability
program. For instance, a formal appointment should be on the
clinic’s schedule and the value to the patient of checking in
regularly explained to the client. Consider an appropriate in-
terval for these visits. Four to 8 wk apart is reasonable. These
assessments should stand independent of the pet’s wellness or
preventive care appointments.
· Consider creating a small incentive or “thank you” for the
client. This acknowledges the client’s investment in helping
their pet to be as healthy as possible.
· Recognize that clients who involve their pets in a weight man-
agement program enter the practice more frequently. This pro-
vides multiple opportunities for the client to mention or a
veterinary team member to recognize medical issues that re-
quire attention. Any of these articulated concerns can lead to
scheduling a formal appointment, allowing the practice team to
catch and deal with a medical issue early before it progresses
and expands into something more serious.
Summary
Nutrition is the foundation of pet health and wellbeing and should be
a central component of every canine and feline patient’s healthcare
plan. An objective nutritional assessment is the initial step in a
systematic approach to nutritional management. When performed
at each exam visit, the assessment considers such evolving factors as
the patient’s age, health status, and lifestyle-related risk factors.
Based on the assessment, patient-speciﬁc nutrition recommenda-
tions can be made. Besides health maintenance, these recommen-
dations often have speciﬁc therapeutic goals such as weight loss or
dietary support of chronic or acute disease conditions.
Client attitudes toward pet nutrition, informed by commercial
or nonscientiﬁc information, are often based on individual biases and
subjective but strongly held beliefs. For this reason, effective client
communication is an important factor in achieving adherence with
dietary recommendations. Nutrition conversations with clients
should focus on messaging content as well as the communication
process, with the goal of ensuring that the client has a positive
perception of the practitioner’s nutritional recommendations. A key
element of productive discussions on pet nutrition is to understand
the client’s viewpoint on topics such as pet food choice, dietary
rewards, and weight control.
Integrating nutritional management as a vital part of the
practice’s culture requires the commitment and engagement of the
entire veterinary team. A uniﬁed approach to implementing an ef-
fective nutrition program will promote optimal pet health, thera-
peutic success, a strong veterinarian-client-pet relationship, and a
long-term client association with the practice.
The authors gratefully acknowledge the contribution of Mark Dana
of Kanara Consulting Group, LLC, in the preparation of the guide-
lines manuscript.
REFERENCES
1. Baldwin K, Barges J, Bufﬁngton T, et al. AAHA Nutritional Assessment
Guidelines for Dogs and Cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2010;46:285–96.
2. Brooks D, Churchill J, Fein K, et al. 2014 AAHA Weight Management
Guidelines for Dogs and Cats 2014. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2014;50:1–11.
3. WSAVA Nutritional Assessment Guidelines Task Force Members,
Freeman L, Becvarova I, et al. WSAVA Nutritional Assessment Guide-
lines. J Small Anim Pract 2011;52:385–96.
4. American College of Veterinary Nutrition. ACVN Diet History Form.
Available at: http://acvn.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/ACVN-Diet-
History-Form-2020-FINAL_ﬁllable.pdf. Accessed May 20, 2020.
5. World Small Animal Veterinary Association. Short Diet History Form.
Available at: https://wsava.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/Diet-History-
Form.pdf. Accessed May 20, 2020.
6. Murphy M, German AJ, Cline MG. Establishing a weight management
program in clinical practice. In: Cline MG, Murphy M, eds. Obesity in
the Dog and Cat. 1st ed. Boca Raton (FL): CRC Press; 2019:133–61.
7. Canine Body Condition Score. Available at: https://wsava.org/wp-content/
uploads/2020/01/Body-Condition-Score-Dog.pdf. Accessed April 17, 2021.
8. Feline Body Condition Score. Available at: https://wsava.org/wp-
content/uploads/2020/02/Body-Condition-Score-Cat.pdf. Accessed October
23, 2020.
9. Laﬂamme D. Development and validation of a body condition score
system for dogs. Canine Pract 1997;22:10–5.
10. Laﬂamme D. Development and validation of a body condition score
system for cats: a clinical tool. Feline Pract 1997;25:13–8.
11. Bjornvad CR, Nielsen DH, Armstrong PJ, et al. Evaluation of a nine-
point body condition scoring system in physically inactive pet cats. Am J
Vet Res 2011;72:433–7.
12. Body Condition Score. Available at: https://wsava.org/wp-content/
uploads/2020/01/Muscle-Condition-Score-Chart-for-Dogs.pdf.
Accessed October 23, 2020.
13. Feline Body Condition Score. Available at: https://wsava.org/wp-content/
uploads/2020/01/Muscle-Condition-Score-Chart-for-Cats.pdf. Accessed
October 23, 2020.
14. Freeman LM, Michel KE, Zanghi BM, et al. Evaluation of the use of
muscle condition score and ultrasonographic measurements for as-
sessment of muscle mass in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2019;80:595–600.
15. Freeman LM, Michel KE, Zanghi BM, et al. Usefulness of muscle con-
dition score and ultrasonographic measurements for assessment of muscle
mass in cats with cachexia and sarcopenia. Am J Vet Res 2020;81:254–9.
2021 AAHA Nutrition and Weight Management Guidelines
JAAHA.ORG
175
Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-07-12 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
16. Michel KE, Anderson W, Cupp C, et al. Correlation of a feline muscle
mass score with body composition determined by dual-energy X-ray
absorptiometry. Br J Nutr 2011;106(suppl 1):S57–9.
17. Freeman LM. Cachexia and sarcopenia: emerging syndromes of im-
portance in dogs and cats. J Vet Intern Med 2012;26:3–17.
18. Witzel AL, Kirk CA, Henry GA, et al. Use of a novel morphometric
method and body fat index system for estimation of body composition
in overweight and obese dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2014;244:1279–84.
19. Witzel AL, Kirk CA, Henry GA, et al. Use of a morphometric method
and body fat index system for estimation of body composition in
overweight and obese cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2014;244:1285–90.
20. Purina Veterinary Diets. Available at: https://www.proplanveterinar-
ydiets.ca/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/PPPVD-Fecal-Scoring-Chart-EN-
FINAL.pdf. Accessed April 19, 2021.
21. The Waltham Faeces Scoring System. Available at: https://www.walth-
am.com/sites/g/ﬁles/jydpyr1046/ﬁles/2020-05/waltham-scoring.pdf. Accessed
April 19, 2021.
22. Su DK, Murphy M, Hand A, et al. Impact of feeding method on overall
activity of indoor, client-owned dogs. J Small Anim Pract 2019;60:438–43.
23. Naik R, Witzel A, Albright JD, et al. Pilot study evaluating the effect of
feeding method on overall activity of neutered indoor pet cats. J Vet
Behav 2018;25:9–13.
24. Clarke DL, Wrigglesworth D, Holmes KI, et al. Using environmental
and feeding enrichment to facilitate feline weight loss. J Anim Physiol
Anim Nutr 2005;89:427.
25. Dantas LMS, Delgado MM, Johnson I, et al. Food puzzles for cats:
feeding for physical and emotional wellbeing. J Feline Med Surg 2016;
18:723–32.
26. Association of American Feed Control Ofﬁcials. 2018 Ofﬁcial Publi-
cation. Champaign (IL): Association of American Feed Control Ofﬁ-
cials; 2018.
27. World Small Animal Veterinary Association. Selecting the Best Food for
your Pet. Available at: https://wsava.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/
Selecting-the-Best-Food-for-your-Pet.pdf. Accessed May 20, 2020.
28. Pet Nutrition Alliance. Dare to Ask Nutritional Comparison Manu-
facturer Report. Available at: https://www.petnutritionalliance.org/
chart/index.php/manufacturer-report. Accessed May 20, 2020.
29. Center for Veterinary Medicine. Recalls & Withdrawals. FDA 2020.
Available
at:
https://www.fda.gov/animal-veterinary/safety-health/re-
calls-withdrawals. Accessed May 20, 2020.
30. AAFCO. 2018 Ofﬁcial publication of the Association of American Feed
Control Ofﬁcials; 2018.
31. United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Agriculture Research
Service. FoodData Central. Available at: https://fdc.nal.usda.gov/.
Accessed June 17, 2020.
32. German AJ, Holden SL, Wiseman-Orr ML, et al. Quality of life is re-
duced in obese dogs but improves after successful weight loss. Vet J
2012;192:428–34.
33. Yam PS, Butowski CF, Chitty JL, et al. Impact of canine overweight and
obesity on health-related quality of life. Prev Vet Med 2016;127:64–9.
34. Endenburg N, Soontararak S, Charoensuk C, et al. Quality of life and
owner attitude to dog overweight and obesity in Thailand and the
Netherlands. BMC Vet Res 2018;14:221.
35. German AJ, Titcomb JM, Holden SL, et al. Cohort study of the success
of controlled weight loss programs for obese dogs. J Vet Intern Med
2015;29:1547–55.
36. Vasconcellos RS, Borges NC, Gonçalves KNV, et al. Protein intake
during weight loss inﬂuences the energy required for weight loss and
maintenance in cats. J Nutr 2009;139:855–60.
37. Smith G, Paster ER, Powers MY, et al. Lifelong diet restriction and
radiographic evidence of osteoarthritis of the hip joint in dogs. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2006;229:690–3.
38. Greco DS, Royschuk RA, Ogilvie GK, et al. The effect of levothyroxine
treatment on resting energy expenditure of hypothyroid dogs. J Vet
Intern Med 1998;12:7–10.
39. Scarlett JM, Donoghue S. Associations between body condition and
disease in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1998;212:1725–31.
40. Cho K-D, Paek J, Kang JH, et al. Serum adipokine concentrations in dogs
with naturally occurring pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. J Vet
Intern Med 2014;28:429–36.
41. Slater MR, Robinson LE, Zoran DL, et al. Diet and exercise patterns in
pet dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1995;207:186–90.
42. Zamansky A, van der Linden D, Hadar I, et al. Log my dog: perceived
impact of dog activity tracking. Computer 2019;52:35–43.
43. Martin L, Siliart B, Dumon H, et al. Leptin, body fat content and energy
expenditure in intact and gonadectomized adult cats: a preliminary
study. J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr 2001;85:195–9.
44. Root MV, Johnston SD, Olson PN. Effect of prepuberal and postpuberal
gonadectomy on heat production measured by indirect calorimetry in
male and female domestic cats. Am J Vet Res 1996;57:371–4.
45. Jeusette I, Detilleux J, Cuvelier C, et al. Ad libitum feeding following
ovariectomy in female beagle dogs: effect on maintenance energy re-
quirement and on blood metabolites. J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr 2004;
88:117–21.
46. Lund EM, Armstrong PJ, Kirk CA, et al. Prevalence and risk factors for
obesity in adult dogs from private US veterinary practices. Int J Appl Res
Vet Med 2006;4:177–86.
47. Lund EM, Armstrong PJ, Kirk CA, et al. Prevalence and risk factors for
obesity in adult cats from private US veterinary practices. Int J Appl Res
Vet Med 2005;3:91.
48. Adams VJ, Watson P, Carmichael S. Exceptional longevity and po-
tential determinants of successful ageing in a cohort of 39 Labrador
retrievers: results of a prospective longitudinal study. Acta Vet Scand
2016;58:29.
49. Laﬂamme DP, Martineau B, Jones B, et al. Effect of age on maintenance
energy requirements and apparent digestibility of canine diets. Com-
pend Contin Educ Small Animal Pract 2000;22:113.
50. Divol G, Priymenko N. A new model for evaluating maintenance en-
ergy requirements in dogs: allometric equation from 319 pet dogs. J
Nutr Sci 2017;6:e53.
51. Bermingham EN, Thomas DG, Cave NJ, et al. Energy requirements of
adult dogs: a meta-analysis. PLoS One 2014;9:e109681.
52. Speakman JR, van Acker A, Harper EJ. Age-related changes in the
metabolism and body composition of three dog breeds and their re-
lationship to life expectancy. Aging Cell 2003;2:265–75.
53. Penell JC, Morgan DM, Watson P, et al. Body weight at 10 years of age
and change in body composition between 8 and 10 years of age were
related to survival in a longitudinal study of 39 Labrador retriever dogs.
Acta Vet Scand 2019;61:42.
54. Teshima E, Brunetto MA, Vasconcellos RS, et al. Nutrient digestibility,
but not mineral absorption, is age-dependent in cats. J Anim Physiol
Anim Nutr (Berl) 2010;94:e251–8.
55. Perez-Camargo G. Cat nutrition: what is new in the old? Compend
Contin Educ Pract Vet 2004;26:5–10.
56. Taylor EJ, Adams C, Neville R. Some nutritional aspects of ageing in
cats and dogs. Proc Nutr Soc 1995;54:645–56.
57. Colliard L, Ancel J, Benet J-J, et al. Risk factors for obesity in dogs in
France. J Nutr 2006;136(suppl 7):1951S–4S.
176
JAAHA
|
57:4
Jul/Aug 2021
Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-07-12 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
58. Lund EM, Armstrong PJ, Kirk CA, et al. Health status and pop-
ulation characteristics of dogs and cats examined at private veteri-
nary practices in the United States. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1999;214:
1336–41.
59. Rollins AW, Murphy M, Moyers TD. Use of an automatic feeder for
weight loss in multiple cat households: preliminary results [abstract]. J
Anim Physiol Anim Nutr (Berl) 2020;104:405.
60. Lambrecht KJ, Hardar BN, Bernardo TM. Preliminary results using
home pet health technology in a multiple cat household weight man-
agement program. Abstracts of the 20th AAVN Clinical Nutrition &
Research Symposium [abstract]. J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr (Berl) 2020:
104:1588.
61. Porsani MYH, Teixeira FA, Amaral AR, et al. Factors associated with
failure of dog’s weight loss programmes. Vet Med Sci 2020;6:299–305.
62. Deagle G, Holden SL, Biourge V, et al. Long-term follow-up after
weight management in obese cats. J Nutr Sci 2014;3:e25.
63. German AJ, Holden SL, Morris PJ, et al. Long-term follow-up after
weight management in obese dogs: the role of diet in preventing regain.
Vet J 2012;192:65–70.
64. American Animal Hospital Association. Compliance: taking quality care to
the next level: a report of the 2009 AAHA compliance follow-up study.
Lakewood (CO): American Animal Hospital Association; 2009:18. Available
at: https://secure.aahanet.org/eweb/images/student/pdf/Compliance.pdf.
65. des Courtis X, Wei A, Kass PH, et al. Inﬂuence of dietary protein level
on body composition and energy expenditure in calorically restricted
overweight cats. J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr (Berl) 2015;99(3):474–82.
66. Blanchard G, Nguyen P, Gayet C, et al. Rapid weight loss with a high-
protein low-energy diet allows the recovery of ideal body composition and
insulin sensitivity in obese dogs. J Nutr 2004;134(suppl 8):2148S–50S.
67. Weber M, Bissot T, Servet E, et al. A high-protein, high-ﬁber diet
designed for weight loss improves satiety in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2007;
21:1203–8.
68. Wei A, Fascetti AJ, Villaverde C, et al. Effect of water content in a
canned food on voluntary food intake and body weight in cats. Am J Vet
Res 2011;72:918–23.
69. Kurtz S, Silverman J, Draper J. Teaching and Learning Communication
Skills in Medicine. 2nd ed. Oxford (UK): Radcliffe.
70. Tuckett D, Boulton M, Olson C, et al. Meeting between Experts: An
Approach to Sharing Ideas in Medical Consultations. London: Tavistock
Publications; 1985.
71. MacMartin C, Wheat HC, Coe JB, et al. Effect of question design on
dietary information solicited during veterinarian-client interactions in
companion animal practice in Ontario, Canada. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2015;246:1203–14.
72. Coe JB, O’Connor R, MacMartin C, et al. Effects of three diet history
questions on the amount of information gained from a sample of pet
owners in Ontario, Canada. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2020;256:469–78.
73. Kaplan JL, Stern JA, Fascetti AJ, et al. Taurine deﬁciency and dilated
cardiomyopathy in golden retrievers fed commercial diets. PLoS One
2018;13(12):e0209112.
74. Adin D, DeFrancesco TC, Keene B, et al. Echocardiographic phenotype
of canine dilated cardiomyopathy differs based on diet type. J Vet
Cardiol 2019;21:1–9.
75. Conway DMP, Saker KE. Consumer attitude toward the environmental
sustainability of grain-free pet foods. Front Vet Sci 2018;5:170.
76. Coe JB, Adams CL, Bonnett BN. A focus group study of veterinarians’
and pet owners’ perceptions of the monetary aspects of veterinary care.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2007;234:1418–1424.
77. American Animal Hospital Association. The Path to High-Quality Care.
Practical Tips for Improving Compliance. Lakewood (CO): American
Animal Hospital Association; 2003.
78. Schleicher M, Cash SB, Freeman LM. Determinants of pet food pur-
chasing decisions. Can Vet J 2019;60:644–50.
79. Freeman LM, Stern JA, Fries R, et al. Diet-associated dilated cardio-
myopathy in dogs: what do we know? J Am Vet Med Assoc 2018;253(11):
1390–4.
80. Coe JB, Adams CL, Bonnett BN. Prevalence and nature of cost dis-
cussions during clinical appointments in companion animal practice. J
Am Vet Med Assoc 2009;231:1510–8.
81. Kanji N, Coe JB, Adams CL, et al. Effect of veterinarian-client-patient
interactions on client adherence to dentistry and surgery recommen-
dations in companion-animal practice. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2012;240:
427–36.
82. The European Food Information Council (EUFIC). The Determinants
of Food Choice. Available at: https://www.euﬁc.org/en/healthy-living/
article/the-determinants-of-food-choice. Accessed May 30, 2020.
83. Boni SE. Anthropomorphism: how it affects the human-canine bond. J
Appl Compan Anim Behav 2008;2:16–21.
84. Simonsen JE, Fasenko GM, Lillywhite JM. The value-added dog food
market: do dog owners prefer natural or organic dog foods? J Agric Sci
2014;6:86–97.
85. Morelli G, Bastianello S, Catellani P, et al. Raw meat-based diets for
dogs: survey of owners’ motivations, attitudes and practices. BMC Vet
Res 2019;15:74.
86. Michel KE, Willoughby KN, Abood SK, et al. Attitudes of pet owners
toward pet foods and feeding management of cats and dogs. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2008;233:1699–703.
87. Parr JM, Remillard RL. Handling alternative dietary requests from pet
owners. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2014;44(4):667.
88. Laﬂamme D, Izquierdo O, Eirmann L, et al. Myths and misperceptions
about ingredients used in commercial pet foods. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 2014;44(4):689.
89. Food and Drug Administration. FDA Investigation into Potential Link
between Certain Diets and Canine Dilated Cardiomyopathy. Available at:
https://www.fda.gov/animal-veterinary/outbreaks-and-advisories/fda-in-
vestigation-potential-link-between-certain-diets-and-canine-dilated-car-
diomyopathy. Accessed October 23, 2020.
90. Backus RC, Cohen G, Pion PD, et al. Taurine deﬁciency in New-
foundlands fed commercially available complete and balanced diets. J
Am Vet Med Assoc 2003;223:1130–6.
91. Vollmar C, Vollmar A, Keene BW, et al. Dilated cardiomyopathy in 151
Irish wolfhounds: characteristic clinical ﬁndings, life expectancy and
causes of death. Vet J 2019;245:15–21.
92. Considine KM, Kelly AL, Fitzgerald GF, et al. High-pressure processing-
effects on microbial food safety and food quality. FEMS Microbiol Lett
2008;281(1):1–9.
93. Larsen JA, Parks EM, Heinze CR, et al. Evaluation of recipes for home-
prepared diets for dogs and cats with chronic kidney disease. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2012;240(5):532–8.
94. Rudinsky AJ, Rowe JC, Parker VJ. Nutritional management of chronic
enteropathies in dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2018;253(5):570–8.
95. Heinze CR, Gomez FC, Freeman LM. Assessment of commercial diets
and recipes for home-prepared diets recommended for dogs with
cancer. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2012;241(11):1453–60.
96. Stockman J, Fascetti AJ, Kass PH, et al. Evaluation of recipes of home-prepared
maintenance diets for dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2013;242(11):1500–5.
2021 AAHA Nutrition and Weight Management Guidelines
JAAHA.ORG
177
Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-07-12 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
97. Finley R, Ribble C, Aramini J, et al. The risk of salmonellae shedding by dogs fed
Salmonella-contaminated commercial raw food diets. Can Vet J 2007;48:69–75.
98. Johnson LN, Linder DE, Heinze CR, et al. Evaluation of owner expe-
riences and adherence to home-cooked diet recipes for dogs. J Small
Anim Pract 2016;57:23–7.
99. American Animal Hospital Association. Raw Protein Diet. Available at:
https://www.aaha.org/about-aaha/aaha-position-statements/raw-protein-
diet/. Accessed October 23.2020.
100. Davies RH, Lawes JR, Wales AD. Raw diets for dogs and cats: a review,
with particular reference to microbiological hazards. J Small Anim Pract
2019;60:329–39.
101. van Bree FPJ, Bokken GCAM, Mineur R, et al. Zoonotic bacteria and par-
asites found in raw meat-based diets for cats and dogs. Vet Rec 2018;182:50.
102. Reimschuessel R, Grabenstein M, Guag J, et al. Multilaboratory survey to
evaluate Salmonella prevalence in diarrheic and nondiarrheic dogs and cats in
the United States between 2012 and 2014. J Clin Microbiol 2017;55(5):1350–68.
103. Summers SC, Stockman J, Larsen JA, et al. Evaluation of phosphorus,
calcium, and magnesium content in commercially available foods for-
mulated for healthy cats. J Vet Intern Med 2020;34:266–73.
104. Salt C, Morris PJ, German AJ, et al. Growth standard charts for monitoring
bodyweight in dogs of different sizes. PLoS One 2017;12(9):e0182064.
105. Larsen J. Feeding large-breed puppies. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
2010;32(5):E1–4.
106. Hutchinson D, Freeman LM, Schreiner KE, et al. Survey of opinions
about nutritional requirements of senior dogs and analysis of nutrient
proﬁles of commercially available diets for senior dogs. Intern J Appl Res
Vet Med 2011;9:68–79.
107. Barko PC, McMichael MA, Swanson KS, et al. The gastrointestinal
microbiome: a review. J Vet Intern Med 2018;32(1):9–25.
108. Marks SL, Rankin SC, Byrne BA, et al. Enteropathogenic bacteria in
dogs and cats: diagnosis, epidemiology, treatment, and control. J Vet
Intern Med 2011;25(6):1195–208.
109. Weese JS, Martin H. Assessment of commercial probiotic bacterial
contents and label accuracy. Can Vet J 2011;52(1):43–6.
110. Dzanis DA. Regulatory aspects of diets, supplements, and nutraceut-
icals. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 1998;13(4):193–6.
111. Gross KL, Jewell DE, Yamka RM, et al. Macronutrients. In: Hand MS,
Thatcher CD, Remillard RL, et al., eds. Small Animal Clinical Nutrition.
5th ed. Topeka (KS): Mark Morris Institute; 2010:61.
178
JAAHA
|
57:4
Jul/Aug 2021
Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-07-12 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
