 
JFMS CLINICAL PRACTICE  211
S P E C I A L  A R t i c l e
Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery (2021) 23, 211–233
2021 AAHA/AAFP Feline  
Life Stage Guidelines
Abstract: The guidelines, authored by a Task Force of experts in feline clinical medicine, are an update  
and extension of the AAFP–AAHA Feline Life Stage Guidelines published in 2010. The guidelines are 
published simultaneously in the Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery (volume 23, issue 3, pages 211–233, 
DOI: 10.1177/1098612X21993657) and the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association (volume 57, 
issue 2, pages 51–72, DOI: 10.5326/JAAHA-MS-7189). A noteworthy change from the earlier guidelines is  
the division of the cat’s lifespan into a five-stage grouping with four distinct age-related stages (kitten, young 
adult, mature adult, and senior) as well as an end-of-life stage, instead of the previous six. This simplified 
grouping is consistent with how pet owners generally perceive their cat’s maturation and aging process,  
and provides a readily understood basis for an evolving, individualized, lifelong feline healthcare strategy.  
The guidelines include a comprehensive table on the components of a feline wellness visit that provides  
a framework for systematically implementing an individualized life stage approach to feline healthcare. 
Included are recommendations for managing the most critical health-related factors in relation to a cat’s life 
stage. These recommendations are further explained in the following categories: behavior and environmental 
needs; elimination; life stage nutrition and weight management; oral health; parasite control; vaccination; 
zoonoses and human safety; and recommended diagnostics based on life stage. A discussion on 
overcoming barriers to veterinary visits by cat owners offers practical advice on one of the most challenging 
aspects of delivering regular feline healthcare.  
 
Keywords: Feline life stage; kitten; adult; senior; veterinary; healthcare examination; medical history; 
behavior; risk assessment; elimination 
 
Abbreviations: BCS (body condition score); DER (daily energy requirements); DJD (degenerative joint 
disease); FCV (feline calicivirus); FeLV (feline leukemia virus); FHV-1 (feline herpesvirus type 1); FIC (feline 
idiopathic cystitis); FPV (feline panleukopenia virus); GI (gastrointestinal); HARD (heartworm-associated 
respiratory disease); MCS (muscle condition score); RER (resting energy requirements); T4 (thyroxine)
Introduction 
 
The feline patient’s life stage is the most fun‑
damental presentation factor the practitioner 
encounters in a regular examination visit. 
Most of the components of a treatment or 
healthcare plan are guided by the patient’s life 
stage, progressing from kitten to young adult, 
mature adult, and senior and concluding with 
the end‑of‑life stage. Because a cat can transi‑
tion from one life stage to another in a short 
period of time, each examination visit should 
include a life stage assessment. The “2021 
AAHA/AAFP Feline Life Stage Guidelines” 
provide a comprehensive age‑associated 
framework for promoting health and longevi‑
ty throughout a cat’s lifetime. The guidelines 
were developed by a Task Force of experts in 
feline clinical medicine. Their recommenda‑
DOI: 10.1177/1098612X21993657 
© 2021 by American Animal Hospital Association, American Association  
of Feline Practitioners and International Society of Feline Medicine
Jessica Quimby 
DVM, PhD, DACVIM*  
Co-Chair of 2021 
AAHA/AAFP Feline  
Life Stage Guidelines  
Task Force 
The Ohio State University, 
Department of Veterinary 
Clinical Sciences, 
Columbus, Ohio, USA  
 
Shannon Gowland 
DVM, DABVP 
Co-Chair of 2021 
AAHA/AAFP Feline  
Life Stage Guidelines  
Task Force 
OVC Smith Lane Animal 
Hospital, Ontario Veterinary 
College, Guelph, Ontario, 
Canada  
 
Hazel C Carney  
DVM, MS, DABVP 
WestVet Emergency  
and Specialty Center, 
Garden City, Idaho, USA  
 
Theresa DePorter 
DVM, MRCVS, DACVB, 
DECAWBM 
Oakland Veterinary Referral 
Services, Bloomfield Hills, 
Michigan, USA 
 
Paula Plummer 
LVT, VTS (ECC, SAIM)   
Texas A&M University 
Veterinary Medical Teaching 
Hospital, College Station, 
Texas, USA  
 
Jodi Westropp  
DVM, PhD, DACVIM 
University of California, 
Davis, School of Veterinary 
Medicine, Davis, California, 
USA   
 
*Corresponding author:  
quimby.19@osu.edu
These guidelines were prepared by a Task Force 
of experts convened by the American Animal 
Hospital Association (AAHA) and the American 
Association of Feline Practitioners (AAFP) and 
were subjected to a formal peer-review process. 
This document is intended as a guideline only, not 
an AAHA or AAFP standard of care. These guide-
lines and recommendations should not be con-
strued as dictating an exclusive protocol, course 
of treatment, or procedure. Variations in practice 
may be warranted based on the needs of the  
individual patient, resources, and limitations unique 
to each individual practice setting. Evidence-based 
support for specific recommendations has been 
cited whenever possible and appropriate. 
Other recommendations are based on practical 
clinical experience and a consensus of expert opin-
ion. Further research is needed to document some 
of these recommendations. Because each case is 
different, veterinarians must base their decisions on 
the best available scientific evidence in conjunction 
with their own knowledge and experience.
improve compliance with preventive health‑
care recommendations.  
These guidelines complement and update 
earlier feline life stage guidelines published in 
2010.6 An important distinction of the 2021 
guidelines is the Task Force’s decision to 
reduce the number of feline life stages from 
six to four distinct age‑related stages as well 
as an end‑of‑life stage (five stages overall; 
Table 1). Although the physiologic basis for 
six feline life stages remains valid, a five‑stage 
grouping makes clinical protocols easier to 
implement and simplifies the dialog between 
the practice team and cat owners. In this 
regard, the guidelines are not only a useful 
resource for practitioners but also the basis for 
client education that is tailored to the feline 
patient’s life stage progression. 
The items to perform or discuss during  
each life stage are highlighted in Table 2. 
Veterinary professionals should use this table 
to identify the differences between each life 
stage. The text in the rest of the guidelines 
document identifies select areas in the table 
that warrant further explanation, but is not 
intended as a comprehensive review. 
 
Importance of feline-friendly 
handling 
 
Both AAHA and the AAFP understand that a 
major barrier to feline veterinary visits is the 
concern about the level of stress the patient 
will be experiencing during the visit. There are 
many recommendations available to help 
decrease the stress of feline patients during 
transportation to, and time spent in, the  
veterinary practice. Unless otherwise specified, 
the reader should assume that these stress‑
reduction recommendations and techniques are 
applicable to all aspects of the veterinary visit 
at all life stages described in these guidelines. 
tions are a practical resource to guide individ‑
ualized risk assessment, preventive healthcare 
strategies, and treatment pathways that 
evolve as the cat matures. 
An evidence‑guided framework for manag‑
ing a cat’s healthcare throughout its lifetime 
has never been more important in feline prac‑
tice than it is now. Cats are the most popular 
pet in the United States.1 A great anomaly in 
feline practice is that although most owners 
consider their cats to be family members, cats 
are substantially underserved in the primary 
care setting compared with dogs.2 In 2006, 
owners took their dogs to veterinarians more 
than twice as often as cats: 2.3 times/year for 
dogs versus 1.1 times/year for cats.3 This 
healthcare use imbalance persists to the  
present day. Cat owners often express a belief 
that their pets “do not need medical care.” 
Two reasons for this misconception are that 
signs of illness and pain are often difficult to 
detect in the sometimes reclusive or stoic cat, 
and that cats are perceived to be self‑sufficient. 
Specific objectives of the guidelines are (1) to 
define distinct feline life stages consistent with 
how pet owners generally perceive their cat’s 
maturation and aging process, and (2) to pro‑
vide a readily understood basis for an evolv‑
ing, individualized, lifelong healthcare strategy 
for each feline patient at every life stage. In this 
regard, the Task Force has identified certain 
common features of each feline life stage that 
provide an incentive for regular healthcare 
visits and inform a patient‑specific healthcare 
approach. These life stage characteristics are 
defined in a comprehensive table listing the 
client discussion topics and action items for 
each feline life stage. In effect, the table defines 
what needs to be done at each life stage. This 
prescriptive approach to healthcare manage‑
ment based on a cat’s life stage is explained and 
justified in the well‑referenced narrative that 
makes up the rest of the guidelines. The Task 
Force considers end of life and its precursor 
events to be a separate feline life stage. Rather 
than discussing end of life in these guidelines, 
practitioners can access this topic in previous‑
ly published “2016 AAHA/IAAHPC End‑of‑
Life Care Guidelines”4 and the “2021 AAFP 
End of Life Online Educational Toolkit”.5  
A recurring emphasis throughout the 
guidelines is the importance of feline‑friendly 
handling techniques in the waiting area and 
examination settings. Using feline‑friendly 
handling is a critical factor in eliminating the 
barriers to regular feline healthcare. This 
patient‑centric approach can reduce the cat’s 
stress, improve handler safety, and create a 
more positive experience for the patient, 
client, and care provider. Together, these out‑
comes have the potential to increase the  
frequency of feline examination visits and 
 212 JFMS CLINICAL PRACTICE
S P E C I A L  ARticle /  2021 AAHA/AAFP feline life stage guidelines
Using  
feline-friendly 
handling 
techniques  
to reduce 
stress will give 
the patient  
and owner  
a positive 
experience that 
will carry over 
to future 
examination 
visits. 
Kitten 
Birth up 
to 1 year
Young adult 
1–6 years
Mature adult 
7–10 years
Senior 
>10 years
End of life 
Variable
Image © Voren1/iStock, spxChrome/E+, AaronAmat/iStock, 
AngiePhotos/iStock via Getty Images Plus
3Table 1
Feline life stages
 
JFMS CLINICAL PRACTICE  213
S P E C I A L  ARticle /  2021 AAHA/AAFP feline life stage guidelines
A L L  C AT S  N E E D  A  F U L L  T H O R O U G H  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N AT I O N
Kitten (birth up to 1 year)
Young adult (1–6 years)
Mature adult (7–10 years)
Senior (>10 years)
Discussion 
items for all 
life stages
< Frequency of visits: minimum of annual examinations and at least every 6 months for seniors 
< Educate the client on: 
– The subtle signs of behavior, illness, pain, and anxiety 
– Normal feline behaviors and the significance of changes in the cat’s behavior 
– The importance of preventive healthcare and carrier acclimation 
– Disaster preparedness 
– Identification options such as microchipping 
– Sterilization 
– Claw care, natural scratching behavior, and alternatives to declawing 
< Discuss elimination habits and any house-soiling 
< Present pet insurance and financial planning options 
< Obtain previous medical/surgical history (including medications and supplements) 
< Evaluate personality and temperament; make recommendations for optimal future examinations 
< Evaluate patient demeanor to determine the appropriate approach to the physical examination 
< Ask about daily food and water intake  
< Discuss diets and feeding as well as make recommendations 
< Assess and discuss quality of life when clinically relevant  
< Veterinarians should familiarize themselves with common breed predispositions
Medical 
history
< Discuss breed healthcare 
predispositions and 
congenital/genetic concerns
< Ask about vomiting, 
vomiting hairballs, and 
diarrhea 
< Ask about changes  
in grooming habits 
< Ask about changes  
in behavior
< Ask about changes in appetite and hydration 
< Ask about polyuria, polydipsia, vomiting, and diarrhea 
< Ask about increased nocturnal activity and vocalization 
< Discuss early signs of cognitive decline 
< Ask about changes in mobility 
< Ask about changes in vision 
< Ask about changes in grooming habits 
< Ask about masses
Examination 
focus (extra 
attention 
during 
physical 
examination)
< Discuss congenital/genetic 
findings (murmurs, hernias,  
and dentition) 
< Discuss infectious disease 
< Increase focus on 
cardiorespiratory and 
dermatologic findings 
< Focus on oral examination 
to detect periodontal disease 
and tooth resorption 
< Increase focus on oral examination, abdominal palpation,  
and ophthalmic (fundic), cardiorespiratory, and musculoskeletal 
examination 
< Concentrate on thyroid gland and kidney palpation 
< Conduct thorough pain assessment 
< Record body weight, BCS, and MCS 
< Consider (dorsal and lateral) photographs of patient to help identify future changes 
< Monitor for changes in usual patient demeanor 
< Record successful feline-friendly handling techniques and preferences
Nutrition  
and weight 
management
< Discuss diet, quantity being 
fed, intake amounts, and 
frequency of feeding 
< Introduce variety of food 
flavors and textures 
< Introduce food foraging toys 
and puzzles
< Monitor for weight gain 
< Discuss obesity risks 
< Provide ongoing advice for 
enrichment, play, and exercise 
< Monitor for weight loss and weight gain 
< Discuss diseases associated with changes in appetite  
or weight 
< Discuss use of appropriate therapeutic diets
< Feed to ideal BCS and MCS
Behavior and 
environment
< Discuss importance of:  
– Introducing kittens to 
various people and pets 
during the socialization period 
– Acclimating to handling, 
brushing, nail trimming, 
grooming, and medication 
administration 
– Acclimating to carrier, car, 
and veterinary visits 
< Discourage use of hands  
or feet as toys during play  
to avoid risk of future 
aggressive behavior 
< Encourage teaching 
cue/response, such as  
come or sit, using positive 
reinforcement
< Discuss that intercat 
interactions may decline 
< Discuss that intercat or 
human–cat relationships may 
change with maturity or 
following stressful events 
< Encourage acceptance of 
manipulation of mouth, ears, 
and feet by providing gentle 
handling
< Environmental needs may change: ensure good/easy 
accessibility to litter box, warm soft bed, food/water 
< Educate clients about subtle behavior changes that  
are not “just old age” 
< Monitor cognitive function
< Ensure number, distribution, and location of resources is adequate
< Discuss importance of number, distribution, and location of resources for each cat in the home 
< Ask about housing (indoor/outdoor/partial outdoor access), hunting activity, and children and other pets in the home 
< Discuss housemate cats and their usual interactions. Ask if there are any concerns 
< Ask about problematic or changes in behavior 
< Ensure environmental needs of the cat(s) are met (toys, scratching posts, resting places, play) 
< Discuss managing unwanted behaviors; discourage punishment and encourage positive reinforcement 
Table 2
Items to perform or discuss during each life stage (continued on page 214)
 214 JFMS CLINICAL PRACTICE
Safe and gentle handling will reduce the 
stress response of the patient. By applying 
feline‑friendly handling techniques, the 
team can proactively perform the entire 
examination and diagnostic procedures 
in a way that improves patient comfort 
and time efficiency as well as the 
patient, client, and practice team expe‑
rience. In efforts to reduce stress, keep 
the most invasive parts until the end, 
such as the dental examination, temper‑
ature assessment or nail trim, sample col‑
lection, and imaging. It is important to note 
in the patient record which aspect(s) of the 
S P E C I A L  ARticle /  2021 AAHA/AAFP feline life stage guidelines
examination may stress that individual cat so 
those components can be saved until the end 
during future visits. 
Using feline‑friendly handling tech‑
niques to reduce stress will give the 
patient and owner a positive experience 
that will carry over to future examination 
visits. The patient will often retain this 
positive conditioning, allowing the prac‑
tice team to provide the best possible care 
throughout the cat’s lifetime. A feline‑
friendly approach will also positively impact 
the practice team dynamic and confidence 
when handling, treating, and caring for cats.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
FELINE-FRIENDLY STRATEGIES 
Feline-friendly handling and cat-friendly 
strategies are described in detail in the 
“AAFP and ISFM Feline-Friendly Handling 
and Nursing Care Guidelines”,8,9 as well as 
the AAFP Cat Friendly Certificate 
Program10 for individuals and  
Cat Friendly Practice® Program.11 
A L L  C AT S  N E E D  A  F U L L  T H O R O U G H  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N AT I O N
Kitten (birth up to 1 year)
Young adult (1–6 years)
Mature adult (7–10 years)
Senior (>10 years)
Elimination
< Discuss litter box setup, 
cleaning, and normal 
elimination behavior 
< Start with unscented 
clumping sand litter and/or  
the litter type the kitten was 
previously using 
< Allow kittens to choose litter 
preference by offering a variety 
of litter types
< Confirm that litter box  
size (length and height) 
accommodates the growing 
cat
< Review the location of the litter boxes to avoid stairs for 
painful cats including those with DJD  
< Review and adjust litter box size (length and height), location, 
and cleaning regimens as necessary 
< Discuss elimination habits  
< Ask if any urination or defecation occur outside the litter box 
– Distinguish between toileting and marking behaviors  
< Discuss litter box management (number, size, location, litter type, and cleaning) 
< Educate clients about how to assess stool appearance and litter ball size
Oral health
< Acclimate to mouth 
handling and brushing/wiping 
of teeth 
< Examine for malocclusion  
or developmental dental issues
< Recommend dental diet  
if clinically indicated 
< Monitor for oral tumors, inability to eat and decreased quality 
of life from painful dental disease 
< Perform detailed dental examination; discuss dental disease, preventive healthcare, dental prophylaxis, and importance of 
treatment/home care with brushing/wiping of teeth
Parasite 
control 
< Assess risks of exposure based on lifestyle, geographic location, and travel 
< Educate clients that even indoor-only cats have a real risk for parasitic infections  
< Recommend year-round broad-spectrum antiparasitics with efficacy against heartworms, intestinal parasites, and fleas for  
all patients, regardless of indoor/outdoor status 
< Recommend tick control as indicated by risk assessment 
< Perform fecal examination as appropriate 
< Discuss and mitigate zoonotic risks
Vaccination
< FCV, FHV-1, FPV, FeLV, and 
rabies are considered core 
vaccines. The interval between 
the initial series vaccines 
varies depending on the 
infectious disease, age at initial 
vaccination, vaccine label, type 
of vaccine (inactivated, 
attenuated live, and 
recombinant), and route of 
administration (parenteral 
versus intranasal) 
< FCV, FHV-1, and FPV 
revaccination is administered 
at 6 months of age7 
< FCV, FHV-1, FPV, and rabies are considered core vaccines. 
Ongoing FeLV vaccination is based on risk assessment of 
exposure to infected cats. Intervals between FCV, FHV-1, and 
FPV revaccinations depend on vaccine label, type of vaccine, 
route of administration, and risk assessment 
< Cats should be revaccinated 12 months after the last dose  
in the kitten series, and then annually for cats at high risk7 
< The risk/benefit of 
vaccinating senior cats should 
be carefully considered in the 
light of their overall health 
status. Where appropriate,  
FCV, FHV-1, FPV, and rabies  
are considered core vaccines 
for healthy seniors. FeLV 
vaccination is based on risk 
assessment
< For rabies vaccinations, AAHA and the AAFP recommend following vaccine label instructions and local laws. 
Chlamydia felis and Bordetella bronchiseptica vaccines are considered non-core vaccines
Table 2
Items to perform or discuss during each life stage (continued from page 213)
 
JFMS CLINICAL PRACTICE  215
S P E C I A L  ARticle /  2021 AAHA/AAFP feline life stage guidelines
Life stage definitions and 
relevant clinical perspectives 
 
The Task Force has designated four age‑ 
related life stages (Table 1): the kitten stage, 
from birth up to 1 year; young adult, from  
1 year through 6 years; mature adult, from  
7 to 10 years; and senior, aged over 10 years. 
The fifth, end‑of‑life stage can occur at any 
age. These guidelines focus on the life stages 
of kitten through to senior. These age designa‑
tions help to focus attention on the physical 
and behavioral changes, as well as the evolv‑
ing medical needs, that occur at different 
stages of feline life. Examples include detec‑
tion of congenital defects in kittens, obesity 
prevention in the young adult cat, and 
increased vigilance for early detection of renal 
disease in mature adult and senior cats. It 
must be recognized, however, that any age 
groupings are inevitably arbitrary demarca‑
tions along a spectrum and not absolutes.  
Although ages have been used to identify 
life stages, it is recognized that there may be 
significant variation among individual cats. 
For example, some senior cats aged 10 years 
and older may remain in excellent physical 
condition and would be best treated as a 
mature adult at the veterinarian’s discretion. 
The guidelines are intended to be a starting 
point from which individualized care recom‑
mendations can be developed. 
 
Discussion items for all life stages 
The Task Force recommends a minimum of 
annual examinations for all cats, with increas‑
ing frequency as appropriate for their individ‑
ual needs.6 Senior cats should be seen at least 
every 6 months and more frequently for those 
with chronic conditions. More information 
can be found in the “AAFP Senior Care 
Guidelines”.12 Seeing patients and clients at 
least annually provides an excellent opportu‑
nity for client education. Table 2 lists a  
number of discussion items relevant to all life 
stages. Some topics such as sterilization, claw 
care, the importance of identification and 
microchipping, and disaster preparedness 
may be covered once in an initial consultation. 
The AAFP Position Statement entitled “Early 
spay and castration” is a source of further 
information on timing of pediatric spay/ 
neutering.13 
Open‑ended questions and requests such 
as, “What would you like to discuss with me 
today?” or, “I hear that [cat’s name] hasn’t 
been eating well, tell me more about that” are 
an excellent start to setting the agenda for the 
consultation. An appointment template can be 
valuable to guide more specific questions 
such as, “Has there been any urination or 
defecation outside the litter box?” to ensure 
other relevant information is not missed or 
left to the end of the consultation. 
Discussions regarding anticipated costs of 
care and presentation of pet insurance options 
can help clients to plan ahead for future care 
needs. In some cases, estate planning may be 
appropriate to discuss. Many other topics will 
be revisited and modified during subsequent 
examinations, including preventive health‑
care 
and 
nutritional 
recommendations. 
Discussing what normal behaviors are expect‑
ed at each life stage, relating this to the 
patient, and reviewing subtle signs of anxiety, 
illness, and pain in cats encourages clients to 
be vigilant and seek care early in the course of 
disease.14 Veterinarians should educate own‑
ers of purebred cats about breed predisposi‑
tions, keeping in mind that most North 
American cats are not purebred, and that 
these conditions are not necessarily restricted 
to particular breeds.15  
Taking a few moments to evaluate and  
discuss the temperament, demeanor, and  
handling preferences of the patient is time 
well spent in terms of setting the stage for a 
reduced‑stress, thorough physical examina‑
tion and for obtaining diagnostic samples. 
Observing how the cat is reacting to the envi‑
ronment may give clues as to its state of 
arousal. If the cat is a new patient to the vet‑
erinarian, the client may know from previous 
experience what works well for their pet.  
For example, does the cat relax when handled 
in a towel? What is the cat’s favorite treat?  
What handling methods have worked well  
or poorly in the past? This knowledge and an 
understanding of reduced‑stress handling 
techniques can help to tailor the approach to 
each patient. Noting these important details in 
the physical examination record will facilitate 
successful, reduced‑stress future visits and 
help to develop individualized approaches 
that work well for each patient. Decreasing 
stress may reduce confounding results during 
physical examination and diagnostic testing, 
as well as when taking vital signs.  
 
Lifestyle risk assessment 
Understanding the lifestyle of the cat is  
important for making thorough and accurate 
preventive healthcare and medical recommen‑
dations. The traditional classification of a cat 
as “indoor” or “outdoor” is oversimplified as 
there may be additional risk factors that war‑
rant consideration.16 Determining whether the 
cat is primarily indoor or has any outdoor 
access is, nevertheless, a starting point. Further 
questioning may reveal details including 
whether outdoor access is through an enclo‑
sure or leash walking versus free roaming, and 
if there is exposure to other cats – be they 
housemates, visiting cats, or foster cats from a 
The Task Force 
recommends  
a minimum  
of annual 
examinations 
for all cats, 
with increasing 
frequency as 
appropriate for 
their individual 
needs. 
 216 JFMS CLINICAL PRACTICE
S P E C I A L  ARticle /  2021 AAHA/AAFP feline life stage guidelines
shelter – and whether the cat attends boarding 
facilities or cat shows. For primarily indoor 
cats, environmental needs are likewise evalu‑
ated. Noting human–cat interaction is also 
important to determine zoonotic risks.17 For 
example, a young adult cat hunting outdoors 
may need different preventive healthcare from 
a mature adult indoor cat living in a retirement 
home and interacting with residents. For fur‑
ther information, readers are referred to the 
“2019 AAFP Feline Zoonoses Guidelines”17 
and the “2020 AAFP Feline Retrovirus Testing 
and Management Guidelines”.18 The role and  
relationship of the cat with respect to the client 
(i.e., the human–cat bond and the care  
philosophy of the owner) is also essential to 
understand. 
 
Medical history and physical examination 
focus based on specific life stage 
For new patients, a detailed history including 
any previous medical or surgical information 
is important to record, including any past or 
current medications or supplements. 
An assessment of the cat’s current diet, 
including intake amount, frequency of feed‑
ing, and the manner in which the cat is fed,19 
is an important part of each consultation, as is 
making a nutritional recommendation to con‑
tinue or change the current diet.  
Evaluation and recording of body weight, 
body condition score (BCS), and muscle con‑
dition score (MCS) are important components 
of the physical examination at all life stages to 
allow early detection of changes and identifi‑
cation of trends.20 Obtaining dorsal and later‑
al photographs of the patient is recommended 
to facilitate monitoring BCS/MCS as the cat 
ages, and can help the owner recognize subtle 
changes.  
Diseases and conditions that require addi‑
tional focus during the examination by each 
life stage are listed in Table 3. 
 
Kittens 
Kittens will have different health risks 
depending on their lifestyle and history, 
including exposure to other cats and the level 
of care provided. Vaccination and parasite 
control history, health status of related cats, if 
known, and clinical signs of upper respiratory 
or parasitic disease are all important areas of 
focus. Nutritional status and weaning history 
are also important areas of inquiry as 
orphaned or undersocialized kittens may 
have behavior concerns.24 Changes in 
demeanor, activity level, and behavior are 
additionally key to note and trend over time. 
Asking specific questions as to whether the 
kitten is displaying any unwanted behaviors, 
counselling clients on normal kitten behavior, 
and giving advice on positive methods to mod‑
ify unwanted behavior are critical discussion 
points at this stage. Breed‑related predisposi‑
tions, signs of genetic disease, and the avail‑
ability and accuracy of genetic testing to detect 
disease should be discussed when relevant.  
The physical examination for kittens typi‑
cally focuses on detection of congenital issues 
such as a heart murmur, hernia, or cleft palate. 
A detailed oral examination is performed to 
detect abnormalities of dentition. The use of 
fecal scoring charts is very helpful to ensure 
that the client can accurately identify stool 
consistency.25,26  
 
Young adult cats 
Lower airway disease is common in young 
adult cats.27 Coughing is a typical sign of 
feline bronchial disease; however, the veteri‑
narian must consider the role of heartworm‑
associated respiratory disease (HARD), 
transtracheal 
migration 
of 
roundworm 
(Toxocara cati), and lungworm. Asking specific 
questions regarding the presence of coughing 
is helpful for early diagnosis and treatment. 
Coughing is not typically a hallmark of  
Understanding the lifestyle of the cat is important 
for making thorough and accurate preventive 
healthcare and medical recommendations. 
Kitten (birth up to 1 year)
Young adult (1–6 years)
Mature adult (7–10 years)
Senior (>10 years)
Diseases and 
conditions  
of relevance  
that require 
increased 
vigilance*
< Genetic and congenital 
conditions 
< Infectious diseases: 
parasitic, viral, retroviral, feline 
infectious peritonitis, upper 
respiratory infection, enteric 
< Dermatophytosis
< Feline bronchial disease 
< Cardiomyopathy 
< Chronic enteropathy 
< FIC and urolithiasis 
< Feline atopic dermatitis 
(non-flea, flea allergy 
dermatitis, non-food allergic 
dermatitis) 
< Systemic fungal disease
< Chronic enteropathies (GI lymphoma, inflammatory bowel 
disease) 
< Chronic kidney disease 
< Hyperthyroidism 
< Diabetes mellitus 
< Neoplasia 
< Cognitive dysfunction syndrome  
< Periodontal disease and tooth resorption21,22  
< DJD: osteoarthritis and spondylosis deformans23
*This is not intended to represent a comprehensive list
Table 3
Diseases and conditions that require particular focus during examination, by life stage
S P E C I A L  ARticle /  2021 AAHA/AAFP feline life stage guidelines
cardiac disease in cats, in contrast to canine 
patients, nor is it caused by hairballs. Young 
adult cats developing cardiac conditions such 
as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy are often 
asymptomatic or may display changes in 
activity level or exercise tolerance. 
Asking 
specific 
questions 
concerning 
whether vomiting, vomiting hairballs, or diar‑
rhea is occurring, and the frequency of each,  
is recommended as some clients may consider 
vomiting or vomiting hairballs to be normal for 
their cat. Additionally, discuss the importance 
of monitoring weight, and ask about any 
chronic enteropathy or gastrointestinal (GI) 
signs that could indicate early stages of disease. 
  
Mature adult and senior cats 
The medical history and examination of mature 
adult and senior cats will be focused on early 
detection of disease. Adult and senior cats are 
often diagnosed with comorbidities. Specific 
questions regarding changes in appetite, occur‑
rence of polyuria and polydipsia, vomiting, 
vomiting hairballs, or diarrhea are of key 
importance to guide diagnostic testing. 
Discussion should also be held with the client 
about increased nocturnal activity and vocal‑
ization as well as changes in the cat’s normal 
habits or activity. These may indicate cognitive 
dysfunction, disease‑reduced mobility, pain, or 
reduced vision. Detecting signs of pain or anx‑
iety and evaluation of quality of life are most 
commonly of concern in the mature adult or 
senior cat but may be relevant at any life stage. 
During the physical examination, particular 
focus is on pain assessment and abdominal 
and thyroid palpation. A detailed musculo ‑
skeletal examination to detect signs of 
osteoarthritis is critical as this condition is one 
of the most significant and underdiagnosed 
diseases in cats.23,28 A fundic examination is 
key to detecting signs of ophthalmic disease 
or hypertension.29 Practices should employ a 
validated pain assessment scale or tool to 
diagnose, monitor, and assist in the evaluation 
of patients for subtle signs of pain.30 
Changes in grooming habits, particularly 
increased grooming, may signal a dermato‑
logic issue such as atopy, food allergy, an 
immune‑mediated skin condition, infectious 
or parasitic disease, endocrine condition, or 
paraneoplastic syndrome.31 Reduced groom‑
ing by the cat may also indicate underlying ill‑
ness, bladder pain, degenerative joint disease 
(DJD) pain, or reduced mobility.  
 
Behavior and environmental 
needs 
 
Understanding and enhancing behavior  
by life stage  
Feline health and welfare are intricately inter‑
related at all life stages. From kitten to senior, 
an appreciation of the behavioral needs of the 
cat is essential for preventing behavior prob‑
lems. Problem behaviors may be manifesta‑
tions of normal feline behaviors, ranging from 
undesirable to pathological misbehaviors. 
Such problems continue to be a primary  
reason for relinquishment.32 House‑soiling 
(marking or toileting outside the litter box)33 
and aggression toward people, housemate 
cats, or housemate dogs34 are commonly 
reported reasons for relinquishment. 
The focus of this section of the guidelines is 
the identification of key interventions at vari‑
ous life stages. An outline of behavior and 
ways to enhance the cat’s welfare at each life 
stage is presented in Table 2. For detailed rec‑
ommendations about normal cat behavior and 
management, readers are referred to the 
“AAFP Feline Behavior Guidelines”.35 
Many of the cat’s natural patterns are con‑
sistent with those of their ancestor, the African 
wild cat.36 Although cats have become a 
favored companion around the world, they 
are not considered fully domesticated. Cats 
are highly social to those individuals they 
have experienced positive interactions with 
during their critical socialization period, 
while at the same time showing independent 
daily activities.37 They use a wide territory in 
natural settings, quite unlike the limited  
environments within human homes. Thus, the 
ideal feline home environment requires plen‑
tiful and thoughtfully distributed resources 
including resting areas, feeding stations, 
water sources, scratching posts, and litter 
boxes.38 Cats develop patterns of resting and 
hiding in the home that should be comple‑
mented by a variety of appealing places. They 
may naturally seek their preferred hiding 
spots if startled or fearful. Some cats prefer to 
go high, which is consistent with the natural 
behaviors of the African wild cat, whereas 
other cats retreat to low spaces.36  
Cats are popular pets that reside in 25% of 
U.S. households with a mean of 1.8 cats per 
household,39 a demographic statistic that 
highlights the importance of understanding 
often complex feline interrelationships. Many 
people believe their cats get along, whereas in 
reality, they may display overt aggression 
(hissing or swatting) or become passively 
avoidant. In contrast, affiliative relationships 
are characterized by behaviors such as 
allogrooming, nose touching, or sleeping in 
close contact.40,41 
 
JFMS CLINICAL PRACTICE  217
From kitten to senior, an appreciation of the 
behavioral needs of the cat is essential for 
preventing behavior problems. 
The ideal  
feline home 
environment 
requires 
plentiful and 
thoughtfully 
distributed 
resources 
including 
resting areas, 
feeding stations,  
water sources, 
scratching 
posts, and  
litter boxes. 
 218 JFMS CLINICAL PRACTICE
S P E C I A L  ARticle /  2021 AAHA/AAFP feline life stage guidelines
 
Feline communication signs 
Although cats may be distressed, they are 
stealthy in their ability to hide anxiety.  
A content cat will hold its ears forward, 
whiskers loose or relaxed, muscles soft, and 
tail loosely wrapped. Practitioners should 
closely observe feline body language postures 
for even the most subtle signs of anxiety and 
tension. Clinical signs of fear or stress in cats 
are displayed through characteristic body 
postures, vocalizations, and activity. A cower‑
ing (tense, flattened) position where the head 
is lower than the body may be indicative of 
stress or fear in cats. A state of distress may 
also be characterized by crouching, crawling, 
and muscular tension; activity may range 
from either freezing or hiding to frantic flee‑
ing. The ears may be held flat, rotated to the 
side or all the way back when the cat is 
aroused, agitated or stressed. Dilated pupils 
indicate greater distress. The whiskers may be 
straight and directed forward. The paws may 
be flat on the examination surface so that  
the cat is ready to flee (versus the cat laying 
with them curled into the body in a typical 
relaxed pose).  
Vocalizations, including hissing, yowling, 
growling, or screaming, may indicate defen‑
siveness. A rapid respiratory rate not associat‑
ed with disease or exertion may also be 
observed. The tail may flip or twitch as the cat 
becomes agitated; the rate and intensity of  
the tail movement correlates with the cat’s  
distress. Other activities and body language 
postures representing a fearful or distressed 
feline state include avoidance and carrying 
the tail low or tucked and swishing.  
It is important to be aware of these signs of 
distress and to respect them. The cat must 
have a way to tell people to “please stop” or  
“I need a break.” When those signals are 
ignored or disregarded, then the cat’s fear 
increases and the signaling escalates.  
 
Kittens  
Genetics, in utero stresses, and poor maternal 
nutrition may affect physical and psychologi‑
cal development.37,42,43 Personality in kittens is 
strongly influenced by the tom and is thus 
genetic in nature rather than observed or 
learned.44 Important aspects of kitten behav‑
ior are learned from the queen, including 
acceptance of foods, toileting habits, substrate 
preferences, and a fear response to other 
species (including people and dogs).35,43,45  
The sensitive socialization period for new 
experiences, people, and other animals begins 
as early as 2–3 weeks and may be closing by 
9–10 weeks.32,42 This period is fluid and can 
vary for each individual cat – what is truly 
important is the quality of the experience. 
Social interactions with littermates provide 
special social bonds. Ideally, kittens should 
have pleasant interactions with people for 
30–60 minutes per day.37,46 Kittens should be 
gently, gradually, and positively acclimated to 
any stimuli (e.g., people including children, 
noises, animals, car transport, veterinary prac‑
tice) or procedures (e.g., nail trims, grooming, 
medicating) they may encounter during their 
lifetime. This can be accomplished by pairing 
conditioning stimuli with food or other entic‑
ing rewards. Avoid stressful or unpleasant 
first encounters. Owners should introduce  
kittens to humans and other pets by allowing 
the kitten to approach and engage on their 
own terms. 
Gentle, respectful handling will prepare the 
kitten for a lifetime of positive handling. The 
kitten that is startled or subjected to rough 
handling may develop fears that last a life‑
time. Kittens have a high play drive and learn 
predatory behavior by watching, swatting, 
chasing, pouncing, and catching. Intercat 
social play peaks at around 12 weeks of age,47 
and then object play becomes more prevalent. 
Throughout the first year, kittens will often 
engage in predatory‑type play. Clients should 
be taught not to use their hands or feet as toys 
during play, as cats will learn that this is an 
appropriate form of play and it can lead to 
scratching or biting injuries. 
 
Toileting 
Cats are innately fastidious. As a result, they 
may be naturally attracted to sand‑type sub‑
strates for elimination. Elimination tends to 
occur away from primary resting locations, 
and feces and urine are often covered, pre‑
sumably to avoid risk of discovery by preda‑
tors. Some practitioners believe that kittens 
are most accepting of the litter they observe 
their queen using, which may influence future 
preferences. With this in mind, it may be  
beneficial to offer a young kitten a variety of  
toileting substrates, with a view to them 
evolving into an adult with greater acceptance 
for an array of litter types.33 (See “Elim ‑ 
ination” section later in the guidelines.) 
 
Incorporating kitten socialization into  
the examination visit 
The initial veterinary examination visit is an 
ideal opportunity to create a positive experi‑
ence and set the stage for a lifetime of regular 
veterinary care. Practice team members 
should educate and show the cat owner how 
to read the cat’s body language, and identify 
signs of stress and fear, such as cowering, flat‑
tened ears, and hissing. They may even use 
tactics to encourage comfort such as slow‑
blink eyes.48  
Kittens should be allowed to explore and 
interact with practice team members. Provide 
Practitioners 
should closely 
observe feline 
body language 
postures for 
even the most 
subtle signs of 
anxiety and 
tension. 
toys that take advantage of the kitten’s strong 
prey drive, as well as palatable foods or treats. 
Kittens are more open to accepting foods and 
should be offered tidbits to divert their atten‑
tion from more unpleasant aspects of the 
examination such as vaccination.  
Currently, in North America, opportunities 
to attend kitten classes or structured socializa‑
tion sessions are limited. Until these opportu‑
nities increase, veterinary professionals 
should consider each kitten’s visit as an 
opportunity to create a positive experience 
and familiarize the kitten with the practice 
team and environment. Team members 
should be trained to use appropriate interac‑
tions including positive reinforcement, gentle 
handling, and use of food or rewards to 
desensitize and countercondition kittens to 
veterinary or handling procedures;8 aversive 
handling or punishment should always be 
avoided. 
 
Training kittens in preparation to be  
adult cats 
Kittens, and even older cats, can be taught 
many behaviors with well‑timed positive 
reinforcement. For example, teaching a cat to 
come when called for a tasty treat can be used 
in carrier training, which will help build a 
positive association with the carrier and, in 
turn, assist with getting to the veterinary prac‑
tice. It may be helpful for a cat owner to 
reward a cat for getting on a small mat so the 
cat will be better prepared for the veterinary 
examination. Interested cat owners can also 
teach their cats agility, fetching, or tricks. 
Moreover, cats can be taught to voluntarily 
accept grooming, nail trimming, instillation of 
ear treatments, application of topical anti ‑ 
parasitics, and administration of medications 
both orally and subcutaneously. Ultimately, 
almost every cat is going to require medica‑
tion at some time in its life, so it is prudent to 
acclimate cats to these types of procedures.  
Kittens may be taught to accept pilling by 
administration of a tasty morsel of food 
instead of a pill. By giving treats that are soft 
enough that they may be wrapped around a 
pill, the young cat is exposed to those foods 
before the need for a pill. Commercially avail‑
able pill pockets may be given empty or with 
a hard piece of kibble hidden inside to accli‑
mate the cat to the change in texture. Kittens 
may even be taught to accept a novel use of 
the old‑style “pet piller” by letting the kitten 
lick moist food off the end of the piller. While 
the kitten is eating, the piller plunger (not the 
piller itself) is advanced to deliver another 
morsel of food into the kitten’s mouth.49,50  
It is imperative to educate cat owners that 
scratching is a normal feline behavior. Positive 
reinforcement for nail trimming warrants  
special consideration because many cats will 
scratch on undesirable surfaces including car‑
peting, window and door frames, curtains, 
and couches. Keeping the nails shorter can 
minimize the damage to household items as 
well as to people. Moreover, meeting the cat’s 
environmental needs may be beneficial in 
reducing scratching of unwanted surfaces.38 
Any intercat‑related issues should be identi‑
fied and addressed as soon as possible, as 
these can lead to increased territorial scratch‑
ing behaviors.51  
Scratching posts and a variety of other 
scratching surfaces should be provided for 
cats as soon as they enter the home. Cats may 
have individual scratching habits, but consid‑
er provision of posts near resting areas and 
high‑traffic pathways. Available scratching 
substrates include rope, cardboard, carpet, 
and wood. One study revealed that rope was 
most frequently used when offered, although 
carpet was offered more commonly.52 Cats 
scratched the preferred substrate more often 
when the post was a simple upright type or a 
cat tree with two or more levels and at least  
3 ft high. Narrower posts (base width less than 
or equal to 3 ft) were used more often than 
wider posts (base width greater than or equal 
to 5 ft). Cats between the ages of 10 and 14 
years preferred carpet substrate. All other ages 
preferred rope.52 The preference of older cats 
for carpet may be due to age‑related musculo ‑
skeletal changes or because these cats may  
not have had the opportunity to use the range 
of substrates as kittens. “Claw Counseling: 
Helping Clients Live Alongside Cats with 
Claws”51 is one of several resources in the 
AAFP Claw Friendly Educational Toolkit.53  
 
Young adult cats 
Young adult cats do not require as frequent 
routine medical care as kittens, so it is integral 
to educate the client about why regular 
healthcare examinations remain so important. 
Routine examinations can help identify 
behavioral changes or medical concerns that 
may affect a cat’s health long before they 
become significant, painful, or more costly to 
treat. Clients should be educated about the 
subtle changes in behavior and day‑to‑day life 
of the cat that may possibly be significant. 
Encouraging owners to routinely record 
behaviors in a journal and/or with photos and 
 
JFMS CLINICAL PRACTICE  219
S P E C I A L  ARticle /  2021 AAHA/AAFP feline life stage guidelines
The initial veterinary examination visit is an  
ideal opportunity to create a positive experience 
and set the stage for a lifetime of regular  
veterinary care. 
These debates reflect geographical and cultur‑
al differences as well as individual owner 
preferences.60–65 The focus should be on pro‑
viding an appropriate, stimulating, and safe 
environment for the cat.38 All cats should be 
microchipped for permanent identification. 
 
Play  
Declining play activity increases susceptibility 
to weight gain. In one study, three 10‑ to 15‑
minute exercise sessions per day led to a  
loss of approximately 1% of body weight in  
1 month with no food intake restrictions.66 
 
Senior cats 
Senior cats exhibiting new or unusual  
behavior should be evaluated for medical con‑
ditions.12 Changes in litter box usage may 
indicate urinary tract disease, constipation, or 
diabetes but may also be due to reduced mus‑
culoskeletal strength, impaired balance, or 
onset of pain. Vocalization, especially night‑
time waking, is a common concern and may 
represent sensory changes (declining hearing 
and vision), cognitive dysfunction syndrome, 
pain, hyperthyroidism, or hypertension. 
Veterinary visits may be more challenging for 
the senior cat, in part because many cat own‑
ers do not seek wellness visits, but present 
their cats only for acute care.3 The use of 
pheromones or pre‑veterinary visit pharma‑
ceuticals such as gabapentin or trazodone 
may reduce stress while allowing thorough 
evaluations.68–71 As many senior patients may 
be experiencing some level of pain related to 
their disease or secondarily to DJD, analgesics 
may also be indicated for veterinary visits. 
DJD and/or muscle weakness may initially 
manifest as a change or reduction in jumping 
video will provide a basis for documenting 
any such changes. Simply asking the client, 
“Is your cat happy?” may help them think 
about their cat’s welfare. 
Urine marking is most often displayed by 
intact male cats, although one study reported 
that about 10% of sterilized cats marked their 
territory with urine.54 The onset of this behav‑
ior can coincide with sexual maturity. Both 
males and females may urine spray.  
Cats may discontinue litter box use for a 
variety of reasons including the litter sub‑
strate offered, litter box cleaning and environ‑
mental hygiene, litter box style (e.g., covered, 
electronic), litter box size, location prefer‑
ences, illness, or stress in the home, including 
conflict between housemate cats. Although 
individual preferences can vary, of the avail‑
able litter types, most adult cats prefer clump‑
ing litter, and most cats prefer plain unscented 
litters.55 Some cats may find scented litters  
significantly aversive.56 Cats have shown a 
tendency to prefer larger litter boxes.57,58 
 
Intercat relations 
The reduction in social play combined with 
the dispersal effect (when free‑living off‑
spring leave the family unit at about 1–2 years 
of age) means that intercat aggression may 
develop at this stage of life. Conflict may 
occur when a new cat is introduced. 
Alternatively, a housemate cat may become 
the target of aggression following a stressful 
event (e.g., returning home from a veterinary 
visit) or owing to redirected aggression trig‑
gered by a cat outside the home.  
Controversy exists over whether cats should 
be kept indoors only or in an indoor/outdoor 
environment (see the “Lifestyle choices” box). 
 220 JFMS CLINICAL PRACTICE
S P E C I A L  ARticle /  2021 AAHA/AAFP feline life stage guidelines
< Indoor-only: An indoor-only lifestyle may decrease the risks 
of injury, predators, poisoning, and exposure to infectious and 
parasitic agents. At the same time, it may increase risks of 
compromised welfare, illness, obesity, and behavior problems 
due to environmental limitations. Appropriate environmental 
enrichment is thus essential for maintaining the mental and 
physical well-being of cats.38 
< Partial outdoor access: An indoor/outdoor lifestyle may 
allow a cat to express normal feline behaviors and provide a 
stimulating environment, but it also may increase the risks of 
infectious and parasitic agents, injury, poisoning, and  
exposure to wildlife and predators. Supervised or controlled 
outdoor access (e.g., during leashed walks or via cat-proof 
enclosures) may reduce some of the risks otherwise associat-
ed with access to the outdoors.  
t L i f e s t y l e  c h o i c e s
For more information, refer to the AAFP Position 
Statement “Impact of lifestyle choice on the compan-
ion cat: indoor vs outdoor”.59
Image © Sdominick/iStock/Getty Images Plus 
via Getty Images
Whatever  
the specific 
lifestyle, the 
focus should 
be on providing 
an appropriate, 
stimulating, 
and safe 
environment 
for the cat. 
 
JFMS CLINICAL PRACTICE  221
S P E C I A L  ARticle /  2021 AAHA/AAFP feline life stage guidelines
or climbing in senior cats. Because of the  
challenges of diagnosing feline arthritis, it  
can be difficult to tell how many cats are 
affected. Estimates from published studies 
suggest that 40–92% of all cats may present 
with clinical signs associated with DJD.72 
These studies show that arthritis, in  
addition to being very common in cats, is 
much more prevalent and severe in older cats, 
and that the shoulders, hips, elbows, knees 
(stifles), and ankles (tarsi) are the most fre‑
quently affected joints. DJD is the inclusive 
terminology that includes the two most  
common changes in aging cats – osteoarthritis 
and spondylosis deformans of the interverte‑
bral disc. Owners may report changes in 
behavior such as “not getting on the counters 
as much” or “doesn’t like his window seat 
anymore.” 
Although it is important to ask about jump‑
ing and climbing, it is critical to listen careful‑
ly to descriptions of changes in behavior, even 
seemingly positive changes. Senior cats may 
have reduced muscle mass or orthopedic con‑
ditions such that they would benefit from 
comfortable and warm resting locations. It is 
also beneficial to increase resource availability 
to reduce the distance seniors might have to 
move in order to reach food, water, or a litter 
box. Conflict with housemate cats may occur 
at any age but may be especially problematic 
for the senior cat (e.g., may have little patience 
for a kitten). 
 
Elimination 
 
House‑soiling is a common reason for cat own‑
ers to seek veterinary advice,33 yet according 
to a 2016 study, only 31.7% of cats with 
house‑soiling behavior were evaluated by 
a veterinarian for this condition.73  
Asking specific questions regarding 
elimination habits and inquiring 
whether 
any 
house‑soiling 
has 
occurred since the last examination is 
an important discussion item for each 
visit. Clients may assume these behav‑
iors are normal or cannot be corrected. 
Timely intervention is critical to address 
these behaviors effectively.  
 
General litter box considerations 
Litter boxes should be provided in different 
locations that are easily accessible throughout 
the house to the extent possible, particularly 
in multicat households. The rule of thumb is 
one litter box for each cat plus one additional 
box, or one litter box for each social group 
plus one additional box, if the number of 
social groups is known. Placing litter boxes in 
multiple quiet locations that are convenient 
for the cat, and provide an escape route if  
necessary, could help facilitate conditions for 
normal elimination behaviors.  
If different litters are offered, it may be 
preferable to test the cat’s preferences by pro‑
viding choices in separate boxes, because indi‑
vidual preferences for litter type have been 
documented.33,58 For cats with a history of  
urinary problems, unscented clumping litter 
may be preferred.55,60 Litter boxes should be 
cleaned regularly and replaced, as well as 
scooped daily. Soap or strong chemicals 
should be avoided; hot water is best. Some 
cats seem quite sensitive to dirty litter boxes.74 
Litter box size and whether the box is open  
or covered may also be important to some 
cats.75,76 It is recommended that the litter box 
be at least one and a half times in size based 
on the length of the cat from nose to tip of the 
tail, which means most manufactured boxes 
are not large enough. Using items such as 
larger storage containers is likely to achieve 
proper litter box size. 
The litter box edges should not be too high 
in order for a kitten or senior cat to enter and 
exit easily. For kittens, discuss appropriate  
litter box management and locations with the 
client to assure proper use by the cat. Litter 
box rejection can stem from a variety of 
causes, and choices can be offered for the 
kitten to express their preference. If 
house‑soiling is noted by the owner, the 
kitten should be evaluated for underly‑
ing conditions such as congenital abnor‑
malities of the lower urinary or GI tract, 
GI parasites, or other infectious diseases. 
Mature adult and senior cats may house‑
soil secondarily to medical or behavioral 
conditions. Clients should be encouraged to 
seek veterinary assistance promptly, in order 
Cats should not be punished. Yelling 
at or startling the cat, spraying the cat 
with water, or other physical forms of 
punishment only serve to scare the 
cat and may lead to cats running 
away or responding aggressively. 
Cats should never be subjected to 
shock collars. Withholding resources, 
such as food, is likewise never  
appropriate. Punishment impairs the 
human–animal bond. Instead, desir-
able behaviors should be rewarded – 
see the AAFP Position Statement on 
positive reinforcement.67
t P u n i s h m e n t
Punishment 
impairs the 
human–animal 
bond.
 
 
 
 
 
  
HOUSE-SOILING BEHAVIOR 
Detailed information on the treatment  
and prevention of house-soiling and the 
design of the optimal litter box is 
provided in the “AAFP and ISFM 
Guidelines for Diagnosing and 
Solving House-Soiling 
Behavior in Cats”.33
to diagnose life‑threatening conditions such 
as urinary tract blockage, and to avoid having 
the behavior become entrenched. 
Cats should never be reprimanded for toilet ‑
ing in undesired locations and should never 
be taken to a litter box punitively. 
 
Urine marking 
If cats at any life stage present with lower uri‑
nary tract signs, the practitioner must obtain  
a definitive history to differentiate various 
underlying causes for the signs. Urine mark‑
ing, which is recognized as a normal felid 
behavior,77 is certainly not desirable for solely 
indoor‑housed cats. Most cats that mark have 
a characteristic posture, whereby their tail is 
lifted and voiding often occurs on vertical sur‑
faces. However, cats can mark on horizontal 
surfaces, especially on owners’ personal 
items. A detailed physical examination and 
environmental history, including a descrip‑
tion of the behaviors, should be obtained for 
these cases. For some questions to consider, 
see the “Investigating urine marking” box. 
Urine marking, although often associated 
with intact male cats, can be displayed by both 
feline sexes, intact or neutered. Neutering is 
nonetheless advisable, supported by a study 
showing that urine‑spraying behavior in a 
small group of 17 free‑roaming domestic cats 
almost disappeared when the cats were evalu‑
ated after neutering.78 Unfortunately, neuter‑
ing will not eliminate or prevent spraying in 
all cats. Because environmental stressors can 
trigger urine‑marking behavior, assuring that 
the environmental needs of the cat are met is 
critical.38  
 
Lower urinary tract disease 
If young adult or mature cats are presented 
with lower urinary tract signs, such as pollaki ‑
uria, hematuria, or periuria, feline idiopathic 
cystitis (FIC) is the most likely differential.79 
Although this is currently a diagnosis of 
exclusion, this disease can be exacerbated by  
a variety of stressors perceived by the cat. 
Notably, there is evidence that complex inter‑
actions exist between “susceptible” cats and 
“provocative” environments in the develop‑
ment of chronic lower urinary tract signs.60  
A study evaluating multimodal environmen‑
tal modification suggested that this form of 
therapy can be beneficial for helping manage 
cats with FIC.80 Affected cats were followed 
for 10 months, primarily by phone contact, 
and significant (P <0.05) reductions in lower 
urinary tract signs were noted.  
Although urine‑marking behavior and FIC 
are different conditions, the environmental 
management of both of these elimination 
problems is similar. Tailoring an environment 
that is optimal for the indoor cat to reduce 
urine marking could also help prevent the 
onset or reduce the severity of FIC.81 Not all 
cats will require intense multimodal environ‑
mental modification therapy, giving practi‑
tioners scope to adapt environmental change 
recommendations based on the cat’s needs 
and owner’s desire and commitment to this 
process. 
 
Senior cats 
For all cats, but especially senior cats, that pre‑
sent with elimination issues, a thorough diag‑
nostic evaluation is recommended. Disorders 
that result in polyuria or polydipsia such as 
diabetes mellitus, chronic kidney disease, and 
hyperthyroidism can lead to elimination 
behaviors. If the cat is defecating outside the 
litter box, a fecal score should be obtained and 
recorded to help follow potential trends and 
guide diagnostic and therapeutic approach‑
es.25,26 Veterinarians should discuss other 
potential problems such as DJD that can lead 
to elimination problems in senior cats. Litter 
boxes should be easily accessible. Cats with 
mobility issues may need a lower litter box 
height, with the box placed close to their core 
areas. Avoiding the need to climb stairs can be 
beneficial.  
 
Life stage nutrition and  
weight management 
 
All life stages 
In the wild, cats are exclusively solitary 
hunters and often will predate animals of 
much smaller body mass than their own. This 
requires them to hunt and feed several times 
during the day.82 Because of evolutionary 
changes, the domestic cat has lost key 
metabolic enzymes, and this has resulted in 
very narrowly defined nutritional require‑
ments.83 All cats require protein, which is 
 222 JFMS CLINICAL PRACTICE
S P E C I A L  ARticle /  2021 AAHA/AAFP feline life stage guidelines
< Where does the voiding occur?  
< Volume of urine? 
< Is the cat defecating and urinating in the litter box?  
< What is the frequency of these behaviors?  
< What is the litter box setup and cleaning regimen (number of litter boxes, 
type[s] of litter, size of boxes, how often they are scooped and cleaned)? 
< How many cats, other pets, and humans are in the household? 
< Are there external cats or animals that might be considered stressors? 
 
Consider asking the owner to draw a floor plan of their home showing the 
location of the litter box(es) in order to help identify other stressors. (Other 
relevant information could be added such as resting places of housemate 
cats that could be blocking access to the box, places with no easy escape 
routes, loud appliances such as a washing machine, high-traffic areas, kids’ 
playroom nearby, etc.)
t I n v e s t i g a t i n g  u r i n e  m a r k i n g
Because 
environmental 
stressors  
can trigger 
urine-marking 
behavior, 
assuring  
that the 
environmental 
needs of the 
cat are met  
is critical. 
 
JFMS CLINICAL PRACTICE  223
S P E C I A L  ARticle /  2021 AAHA/AAFP feline life stage guidelines
composed of 23 different amino acids; 11 are 
considered essential for the cat. Deficiencies  
in any essential nutrients could result in 
health problems.83 No matter the life stage, to 
help avoid potential nutrient insufficiencies, 
cats should be fed diets labeled with an 
Association of American Feed Control 
Officials statement of nutritional adequacy. 
AAHA and the AAFP do not advocate or 
endorse feeding cats any raw or dehydrated 
non‑sterilized foods, including treats that are 
of animal origin.84  
In order to make a nutritional recommenda‑
tion, the practice team can assess nutritional 
status based on age, reproductive status, BCS, 
MCS, activity level, presence of disease, and 
future health concerns for the individual cat.85 
A diet is selected to best meet the nutritional 
needs of the patient, and a specific feeding 
plan is then developed. Clinical discretion is 
applied to allow gradual transitioning to the 
new diet over 7–10 days.85  
 
Kittens 
Kittens can be weaned onto commercially  
balanced kitten foods starting at 3–5 weeks of 
age. Growing kittens at 10 weeks of age have 
a very high energy requirement of 200 kcal/kg 
body weight/day compared with 80 kcal/kg/ 
day at 10 months of age. Generally, kitten food 
preferences have been reported to be highly 
influenced by the queen (i.e., the primary 
effect),86 although these preferences can be 
modified in the adult cat based on experi‑
ences.83 Behavioral and ethological research 
both suggest that cats prefer to eat  
individually in a quiet location where they 
will not be startled by other animals, sudden 
movement, or activity.87,88 Natural feline  
feeding behavior also includes predatory 
activities such as stalking and pouncing. 
These may be simulated by hiding small 
amounts of food around the house, or by 
using a food puzzle from which the cat has to 
extract the food (if such interventions appeal 
to the cat).19 Implementing these options  
during the kitten life stage is recommended 
and also provides opportunity to enrich the 
environment. 
Obesity prevention starts with kittens. As 
neutering is associated with weight gain,89 this 
is an excellent time to evaluate the nutritional 
needs, obesity risks, and prevention strategies 
for the individual patient. Recommendations 
can be found in the AAFP’s “Feline Feeding 
Programs Consensus Statement”.19  
 
Young adult cats 
Energy requirements of cats are influenced by 
a variety of factors including age (i.e., life 
stage), BCS, MCS, neuter status, health status, 
and activity level. Using indirect calorimetry, 
young adult active cats have been shown to 
have higher energy requirements compared 
with senior cats.90 
The amount fed should be adjusted to main‑
tain or encourage ideal body condition, and a 
BCS should be documented by the veterinari‑
an at each visit.91 Photographs (dorsal and lat‑
eral) of the cat can be obtained and recorded. 
A BCS of 6/9 or 7/9 is considered overweight, 
and a score of greater than or equal to 8/9 is 
considered obese.92 The prevalence of obesity 
in cats ranges from 1.8 to 40% in published 
studies.60 Being overweight or obese can  
predispose to a variety of chronic health  
conditions including diabetes mellitus,93,94 
lameness (presumably related to osteoarthri‑
tis and soft tissue injury),93,94 non‑allergic skin 
disease,93,94 
urethral 
obstruction,95 
and, 
according to one study, an increase in the 
prevalence of oral disease.93  
Neutering is a risk factor for obesity in cats, 
especially males,96 and dietary energy restric‑
tion may be appropriate to prevent weight 
gain.97 Free‑choice feeding is a common strat‑
egy used by cat owners and can predispose to 
overconsumption. Maintenance of a healthy 
body weight requires monitoring and control 
of caloric intake. A good starting point is to 
calculate the adult feline patient’s resting 
energy requirements (RER) according to  
the following calculation: RER (kcal per day)  
= 30 × (body weight in kg) + 70. Daily energy 
requirements (DER) are determined based on 
multiplying by a needs factor, which in the 
case of young, healthy adults is 1. Food  
intake can be determined by comparing DER 
with the caloric density of the patient’s 
foods.85,98–100  
Prescription diets are indicated for obesity 
treatment. These weight loss diets are  
formulated to provide adequate vitamins and 
minerals with reduced caloric content. It is 
important to inform owners of overweight 
cats that simply feeding less of a maintenance 
diet in order to reduce caloric intake may 
result in vitamin and mineral deficiencies.  
 
Mature adult and senior cats 
Mature adult and senior cats have changing 
dietary needs, and it is extremely important to 
provide guidance on daily feeding amounts. 
DER for mature adult cats (aged 7–10 years) 
may be equivalent to RER, although adjust‑
ments should be made based on the needs of 
the individual patient. For senior cats (greater 
than 10 years of age), the RER will need to be 
multiplied by a factor of 10–20%, and in some 
cases as high as 25%.101 Senior cats may also 
experience a reduction in digestive capabili‑
ties, leading to decreased BCS and thus 
increased caloric intake.92 Being underweight 
is a common problem in senior cats.102–104 
Behavioral  
and ethological 
research 
suggest that 
cats prefer to 
eat individually 
in a quiet 
location where 
they will not be 
startled by 
other animals, 
sudden 
movement,  
or activity.
 224 JFMS CLINICAL PRACTICE
S P E C I A L  ARticle /  2021 AAHA/AAFP feline life stage guidelines
Prescription therapeutic diets may be indicat‑
ed more often for cats in the mature adult or 
senior life stage for a variety of reasons (e.g., 
chronic kidney disease, obesity, hyperthy‑
roidism, chronic enteropathies, osteoarthritis). 
If a dietary change is indicated, offering the 
new diet in a separate, adjacent container 
(rather than removing the usual food and 
replacing it with the new food) will permit the 
cat to express its preference. Dietary changes 
should be implemented in the home setting 
rather than in the practice in order to avoid 
stress‑related food aversions. However, intro‑
duction of novel diets to inappetent, hospital‑
ized cats should not be avoided if food  
consumption is a concern. 
There is a lack of consensus regarding opti‑
mal dietary protein levels in mature adult 
cats. A published study demonstrated that 
aging cats should in fact receive diets higher 
in protein to avoid loss of lean muscle mass.105 
Healthy mature adult/senior cats should not 
be protein restricted; a diet with a minimum 
protein allowance of 30–45% dry matter is 
considered to be moderate protein and is  
recommended. However, cats with chronic 
kidney disease may benefit from prescription 
renal diets, which have restricted, high‑ 
quality protein and restricted phosphorus  
levels, as well as other ingredients that may 
promote renal health. Ongoing research is 
examining the role of antioxidants in the pro‑
gression of renal disease; one study demon‑
strated the benefits of feeding a diet with 
highly bioavailable protein supplemented 
with fish oil, L‑carnitine, antioxidants, and 
amino acids to senior cats in early renal fail‑
ure.106 Further studies are needed to develop 
definitive recommendations.  
 
Oral health 
 
Lifelong proactive dental care will improve a 
cat’s health and well‑being and should begin 
with the initial kitten visits. If the practice 
team starts to discuss the importance of oral 
health at kitten wellness appointments, the 
owner will come to think of the cat’s dental 
health as being a significant contributor to its 
quality of life.107 After the practitioner has 
determined that no malocclusion or dental 
eruption problems are present,108 practice 
team members can instruct owners on how to 
examine the cat’s mouth and how to brush the 
teeth. Providing videos, written and verbal 
instructions, and samples of products that 
have Veterinary Oral Health Council approval 
will also encourage the owner to begin pro‑
viding oral care.109,110 If these training sessions 
include a treat reward or palatable toothpaste, 
the kitten will learn that handling of its mouth 
normally is not aversive.110,111 
If adult cats will not allow routine tooth‑
brushing, a dental diet may be benefi‑
cial.107,111–113 If both the owner and practitioner 
routinely examine the cat’s mouth as it 
matures, a diagnosis of dental disease, masses, 
or orofacial pain can be made before problems 
escalate and cause pain and hyporexia.107,113,114  
The use of photographic or radiographic 
images of sequential oral examinations, as  
well as scoring sheets for dental pathology, 
generally better communicates the degree and 
progression of pathology. Improved client 
education can encourage cat owners to comply 
with veterinary recommendations regarding 
dental care. Periodic complete dental prophy‑
laxis, including full oral dental radiography, 
even if gross pathology is not present, can  
be beneficial.107 The use of feline‑friendly  
handling techniques and anxiolytics will allow 
a more thorough oral examination. Only after 
the patient has been anesthetized can a  
complete and thorough oral evaluation be  
successfully performed. The comprehensive 
examination includes a tooth‑by‑tooth visual 
assessment, probing, mobility assessment, 
radiographic examination, and oral examina‑
tion charting.115,116 Anesthesia‑free dentistry is 
not appropriate because of patient stress, injury, 
risk of aspiration, and lack of diagnostic capa‑
bilities. Furthermore, because this procedure is 
intended only to clean the visible surface of the 
teeth, it provides the pet owner with a false 
sense of benefit to their pet’s oral health.117–119  
 
Some cats seem to have preferences with regard to their drinking habits,  
a predilection the practitioner or owner can evaluate. Water-related factors to 
consider include freshness, taste, movement (e.g., provided by water foun-
tains, dripping faucets, or aquarium pump–bubbled air into a bowl), and 
shape of container (some cats seem to resent having their vibrissae touch the 
sides of the container when drinking). As with foods, changes in water- 
related factors should be offered in such a way that permits the cat to 
express its preferences. Additionally, water bowls should be cleaned regular-
ly, as should food bowls. Diets higher in water content, such as canned 
foods, may improve overall water intake.
t H y d r a t i o n
If the practice team starts to discuss the importance of oral health  
at kitten wellness appointments, the owner will come to think of the cat’s  
dental health as being a significant contributor to its quality of life.
 
JFMS CLINICAL PRACTICE  225
S P E C I A L  ARticle /  2021 AAHA/AAFP feline life stage guidelines
Parasite control 
 
For kittens and newly adopted cats with an 
unknown history of medical care, it is prudent 
to administer prophylactic treatment for para‑
sites with broad‑spectrum products efficacious 
against heartworms, intestinal parasites, and 
fleas.17,120,121 This approach will eliminate exist‑
ing infections, as well as decrease the risk of  
further infestation and subsequent associated  
clinical problems. Canine and feline house‑
mates may be at risk of transmission of infec‑
tious parasites including roundworm and fleas 
and therefore should be treated in synchronicity 
with newly acquired kittens or cats. Preventing 
cats’ access to gardens and children’s play sand 
areas will, combined with parasite prophylaxis, 
decrease environmental contamination with 
infectious and zoonotic agents such as hook‑
worms and Toxoplasma gondii.33  
Routine, regular use of broad‑spectrum 
products is likely to be beneficial for the major‑
ity of pet cats, regardless of lifestyle. Certain 
outdoor lifestyles, geographic location, and 
whether a cat spends time away from the 
home (travel, boarding facilities, groomer, etc.) 
may increase the existing risk of parasitic 
infection. Thus, recommendations for preven‑
tion and control should reflect knowledge of 
the risks and benefits for the individual cat. 
Fecal examinations, when appropriate, may 
diagnose specific infections and guide thera‑
py; however, negative testing does not rule out 
infection. Ectoparasite prevention will lower 
the risk of cutaneous and systemic diseases.120 
As tick populations increase in number and 
expand geographically, the prevention of tick 
infestations in cats is becoming increasingly 
important. Ticks may act as vectors of feline 
diseases such as rickettsial infection and 
hemotropic mycoplasmosis, and cats may act 
as transport hosts of infected ticks to 
humans.122,123 There has been an upward trend 
in heartworm incidence reported by veterinar‑
ians over the past 3 years in the United 
States.124 Prevention of heartworm infection, 
and subsequent feline HARD or heartworm 
disease, is preferable, as diagnosis is challeng‑
ing at best and treatment difficult because of 
the inherent risks associated with therapy.125 
 
Vaccination 
 
Practitioners can develop individualized  
vaccination protocols consisting of core vac‑
cines (rabies virus, feline herpesvirus type 1  
[FHV‑1], feline calicivirus [FCV], and feline 
panleukopenia virus [FPV]) and non‑core vac‑
cines based on exposure and susceptibility 
risk as defined by the patient’s life stage, 
lifestyle, and place of origin as well as by  
environmental and epidemiologic factors.  
The Task Force supports the “2020 
AAHA/AAFP Feline Vaccination Guidelines”7 
and the World Small Animal Veterinary 
Association’s recommendation that veterinari‑
ans should vaccinate every animal with core 
vaccines and give non‑core vaccines no more 
frequently than is deemed necessary based on 
risk exposure.126 Revaccination against FPV, 
FHV‑1, and FCV at 6 months of age to poten‑
tially reduce the window of susceptibility in 
kittens with maternally derived antibodies 
toward the end of the kitten series (16–18 
weeks) is recommended.7 Feline leukemia 
virus (FeLV) vaccination is considered core for 
kittens and young cats owing to age‑related 
susceptibility, especially those with a high risk 
of regular exposure. It is recommended to 
revaccinate for FeLV 12 months after the last 
dose in the kitten series, and then annually for 
individual cats at high risk. Veterinarians have 
considerable ability to use biologics in a dis‑
cretionary manner but also should be aware of 
any state‑ or provincial‑specific restrictions in 
their veterinary practice act relating to imple‑
mentation, especially in regard to rabies. 
Detailed information regarding the role of  
vaccination as an essential component of  
preventive healthcare is given in the “2020 
AAHA/AAFP Feline Vaccination Guidelines”.7  
Feline injection‑site sarcoma is a real, albeit 
low, risk for cats receiving injectable vaccines.7 
Feline injection‑site sarcomas are aggressive, 
locally invasive neoplasms that are difficult to 
diagnose and surgically remove.7 Practitioners 
should follow the “3‑2‑1 rule” when investi‑
gating suspicious masses.7,127 In order to facili‑
tate surgical excision or amputation in the 
event of sarcoma formation, and the opportu‑
nity to obtain two or three surgical planes, all 
vaccines should be administered in the lower 
limbs or tail, as recommended in the “2020 
AAHA/AAFP Feline Vaccination Guidelines”.7 
Distal limb injections should be administered 
below the elbow or stifle; tail injections should 
be in the distal third of the tail. Because com‑
plete surgical excision of a mass is most diffi‑
cult in the intrascapular space, administration 
at this location is not recommended. Education 
of owners regarding injection‑site reactions is 
prudent. Practitioners are strongly advised to 
keep complete, accurate records of antigen 
administration site and route of vaccine 
administration. 
Veterinarians should vaccinate every animal  
with core vaccines and give non-core vaccines  
no more frequently than is deemed necessary 
based on risk exposure.
 226 JFMS CLINICAL PRACTICE
S P E C I A L  ARticle /  2021 AAHA/AAFP feline life stage guidelines
Control, 
Prevention, 
and 
Biosecurity 
Guidelines”.129 The practice team should 
ensure proper hand hygiene and personal 
protection at all times and alert coworkers to 
likely infectious animals so that possible expo‑
sure can be mitigated.  
Pet food, particularly raw or undercooked 
meat, is also a source of potential zoonotic 
agents.130 Many veterinary and human health 
organizations, including AAHA and the 
AAFP, do not advocate or endorse feeding 
pets any raw or dehydrated non‑sterilized 
foods, including treats that are of animal ori‑
gin.84 Safe food handling should be practiced 
with all pets.  
Avoiding situations that may lead to cat 
bites or scratches is a key part of human safety 
and, in turn, a means to help prevent zoonoses 
associated with these injuries. This is another 
important reason for the practice team to learn 
and engage in feline‑friendly handling tech‑
niques8 and to teach owners techniques to help 
them avoid being bitten or scratched by their 
pet. The risk of cat scratch fever, a zoonotic dis‑
ease caused by Bartonella henselae transmitted 
by fleas, can also be reduced by the use of  
regular, effective flea prevention.17 
 
Zoonoses and human safety 
 
Healthy humans are at very low risk of infec‑
tion with a zoonotic agent through exposure to 
a healthy cat.17 However, immunocompro‑
mised individuals (e.g., older adults, children 
younger than 5 years of age, pregnant women, 
or immunosuppressed individuals) are at 
increased risk of acquiring zoonotic disease 
from pets. Common zoonotic diseases in cats 
(e.g., toxocariasis, toxoplasmosis, ringworm, 
bartonellosis [cat scratch fever]) are described 
in detail in the “2019 AAFP Feline Zoonoses 
Guidelines”,17 as well as within the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention’s “healthy 
pets, healthy people” resource.128 This informa‑
tion can aid in education of the practice team 
and help guide discussions with pet owners. 
Basic preventive healthcare (e.g., internal 
and external parasite control, vaccination) 
protects both feline and human health and is 
further enhanced by management to prevent 
pet roaming. Understanding and instituting 
proper biosecurity measures is a basic tenet of 
preventing zoonoses. Detailed guidance for 
assessing and instituting biosecurity protocols 
can be found in the “2018 AAHA Infection 
Kitten (birth up to 1 year)
Young adult (1–6 years)
Mature adult (7–10 years)
Senior (>10 years)
Complete blood count: 
hematocrit, red blood cells, white blood 
cells, differential count, cytology, platelets
+
++
+++
Serum biochemistry panel:  
at a minimum include total protein, 
albumin, globulin, alkaline phosphatase, 
alanine aminotransferase, glucose, blood 
urea nitrogen, creatinine, potassium, 
phosphorus, sodium, calcium
+
++
+++
Urinalysis:  
specific gravity, sediment, glucose, 
ketones, bilirubin, protein
+
++
+++
T4
+
++
+++
Symmetric dimethylarginine  
and other renal indices 
+
++
+++
Blood pressure 
+
++
+++
Retroviral testing 
+++
+
+
+
Fecal examination 
+++
+
+
+
Testing frequency† 
Single baseline, then as 
needed 
Single baseline, then as 
needed 
Every 1–2 years
At least yearly 
(every 6 months 
recommended)
Detailed information on heartworm testing is available in the American Heartworm Society guidelines125 
*Diagnostics should be tailored to the individual cat and based on history/physical examination. These recommendations are based on the opinion  
of the Task Force for apparently healthy cats and do not include recommendations for preanesthetic laboratory work. In most cases, these tests are 
recommended to establish baseline data and to detect unapparent clinical disease 
†These tests may be done as a single baseline evaluation or at repeated intervals based on the specific needs of the individual cat 
+ = consider based on individual patient; ++ = recommended; +++ = strongly recommended
Table 4
Recommended diagnostics based on life stage*
Basic 
preventive 
healthcare 
(e.g., internal 
and external 
parasite 
control, 
vaccination) 
protects both 
feline and 
human health.
 
JFMS CLINICAL PRACTICE  227
S P E C I A L  ARticle /  2021 AAHA/AAFP feline life stage guidelines
 
Recommended diagnostics  
based on life stage 
 
Recommended diagnostics according to life 
stage are outlined in Table 4. These recom‑
mendations are intended for apparently 
healthy cats and do not extend to preanesthet‑
ic laboratory work. Although specific data 
documenting benefits are not available, the 
Task Force concluded that regular preventive 
healthcare examination and collection of asso‑
ciated medical data can be valuable, allowing 
early detection of disease or trends in clinical 
or laboratory parameters that may be of con‑
cern. Examples include increasing creatinine, 
symmetric dimethylarginine, total thyroxine 
(T4), or blood pressure and decreasing urine 
specific gravity. Additionally, these diagnostic 
results provide a baseline for interpretation of 
data recorded at subsequent visits.  
Specific recommendations regarding fre‑
quency of laboratory testing by life stage 
depend on many factors. One consideration 
regarding testing frequency is that the inci‑
dence of many diseases increases as cats age. 
Although limited incidence studies have been 
performed to identify the age of onset of 
hyperthyroidism in cats, the Task Force rec‑
ommends that veterinarians strongly consider 
T4 testing in the apparently healthy mature 
adult cat. More robust incidence data are 
needed to develop firmer recommendations. 
Comorbidities are extremely common in  
the senior cat and can impact diagnostic,  
treatment, and management approaches. 
Additional considerations relating to diagno‑
sis and management of diseases in mature 
adult and senior cats are described in the 
“AAFP Senior Care Guidelines”.12 Consensus 
guidelines and toolkits for the diagnosis and 
treatment of specific medical conditions are 
available for more detailed information (see 
“Guidelines and toolkits” box). 
For cats of all ages, timing and frequency of 
diagnostics may depend on lifestyle, exposure 
risks, and geographic location. Retroviral test‑
ing recommendations are discussed in detail 
in the “2020 AAFP Feline Retrovirus Testing 
and Management Guidelines”.18 In addition 
to routine deworming, fecal examination 
should be performed regularly at intervals 
based on patient health and lifestyle factors.  
Heartworm infection is more difficult to diag‑
nose in cats than in dogs because of lower 
worm burden, single‑sex infections, and infre‑
quency of microfilaremia. HARD, which is an 
asthma‑like inflammatory reaction of the pul‑
monary tissue to immature larval stages, is an 
added complexity relating to heartworm expo‑
sure in cats. Interpretation of antibody and anti‑
gen test results is challenging, and a thorough 
understanding of the limitations of both tests is 
necessary. More detailed information is avail‑
able in the American Heartworm Society guide‑
lines.125 Testing does not need to be performed 
before starting preventive treatment.  
N‑terminal probrain natriuretic peptide has 
been investigated as a diagnostic tool for  
cardiac disease in cats.138 However, limited 
information exists about using this test as a 
screening tool and recommendations cannot 
be made on the frequency of use for the gen‑
eral population. The decision to use this test 
should be on an individual basis, and inter‑
pretation of test results should be made with 
an understanding of the sensitivity and speci‑
ficity of the assay. 
 
Practice team training and  
client education 
 
Team training and education of clients are 
integral to implementing successful life stage 
recommendations. These two factors will 
allow the practice team to appropriately 
accomplish physical examination and diag‑
nostics, and institute treatment protocols 
when indicated for the patient. Feline‑specific 
training for the practice team should be deliv‑
ered on a regular basis, incorporating contin‑
uing education as well as staff meetings and 
team‑building events held at the practice. 
GUIDELINES AND TOOLKITS 
< “2016 AAFP Guidelines for the Management of Feline 
Hyperthyroidism”.131  
Available at: catvets.com/hyperthyroidism 
< “2016 ISFM Consensus Guidelines on the Diagnosis and  
Management of Feline Chronic Kidney Disease”.132  
Available at: guidelines.jfms.com; DOI: 10.1177/1098612X16631234  
< “2018 AAHA Diabetes Management Guidelines for Dogs and Cats”.133 
Available at: aaha.org/diabetes  
< “2019 AAFP Diabetes Educational Toolkit”.134  
Available at: catvets.com/diabetes 
< “2015 ISFM Consensus Guidelines on the Practical Management of 
Diabetes Mellitus in Cats”.135  
Available at: guidelines.jfms.com; DOI: 10.1177/1098612X15571880  
< “2017 ISFM Consensus Guidelines on the Diagnosis and Management  
of Hypertension in Cats”.29  
Available at: guidelines.jfms.com; DOI: 10.1177/1098612X17693500 
< “2021 AAFP Hypertension Educational Toolkit”.136  
Available at: catvets.com/hypertension 
< “2018 ACVIM Hypertension Consensus Statement”.137  
Available at: DOI: 10.1111/jvim.15331
Team training and education of clients are  
integral to implementing successful life stage 
recommendations.
 228 JFMS CLINICAL PRACTICE
S P E C I A L  ARticle /  2021 AAHA/AAFP feline life stage guidelines
Team training will ensure all staff members 
are knowledgeable and are following practice 
protocols for life stage recommendations. 
From the front office staff and veterinary tech‑
nicians to the veterinarians, everyone will 
know what is expected of them and how to 
respond appropriately in the light of the feline 
patient’s life stage. Team training events to 
increase knowledge and confidence when  
taking patient histories (see “Conducting 
effective patient histories” box) and providing 
client education are just as important as  
further education on feline‑friendly handling, 
disease processes, and technical skills. 
Ideally, client education is a key responsibil‑
ity for all staff members. Every life stage will 
have specific items that should be discussed 
in the veterinary visit (see Table 2), and both 
veterinary technicians and veterinarians 
should be familiar with current recommenda‑
tions and practice protocols in order to edu‑
cate clients on the most critical health‑related 
factors relevant to each life stage. The practice 
team can better connect with clients when 
they understand that pet owners can become 
overwhelmed at veterinary visits. Moreover, 
communicating that the cat owner is an inte‑
gral part of the healthcare team can reinforce 
the veterinary–client–patient relationship, as 
well as improve compliance.  
Equipping the team with the skills to obtain a thorough history  
is imperative. The aim during an examination visit should be to 
obtain detailed information regarding the patient’s 
health (current and past), clinical signs, nutrition, 
water intake, behavior, environment, and lifestyle. 
Use of open-ended questions will encourage  
owners to provide the team with as much useful 
information as possible; closed-ended questions 
that lend only yes or no answers may, by contrast,  
provide only limited information. 
Often, a small change in the way a question is 
asked can yield extra information, allowing the  
veterinarian to follow up with additional probing 
questions and make accurate recommendations. For example, 
asking the question, “How often does your cat drink water?” 
instead of “Is your cat drinking normally?” can 
encourage the owner to be more thorough in 
describing exactly how much water their cat 
drinks. Likewise, “Is your cat eating normally?” is 
unlikely to elicit as much information as the more 
specific question, “Can you describe to me your 
cat’s diet and daily eating habits?” If the owner 
doesn’t know the cat is exhibiting an abnormal or 
subtle behavior, or a clinical sign of a disease, they 
might not naturally bring it up at the visit, which 
could preclude an early diagnosis. 
t C o n d u c t i n g  e f f e c t i v e  p a t i e n t  h i s t o r i e s
Often, a small 
change in the 
way a question 
is asked can 
yield extra 
information.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ADDITIONAL CLIENT EDUCATION 
RESOURCES 
To help educate clients about the importance of  
an individualized, lifelong healthcare strategy for 
their cat, both AAHA and the AAFP have handouts 
available to members and non-members. 
Additionally, more extensive information is 
available at: aaha.org/felinelifestage  
catvets.com/life-stage 
catfriendly.com/life-stage
< The “2021 AAHA/AAFP Feline Life Stage Guidelines” define four distinct age-related feline life stages: kitten (birth up  
to 1 year), young adult (1–6 years), mature adult (7–10 years), and senior (greater than 10 years).  
< End of life and its precursor events are a fifth life stage that is not age specific, and are discussed in separate “2016 
AAHA/IAAHPC End-of-Life Care Guidelines”4 and the “2021 AAFP End of Life Online Educational Toolkit”.5 
< Within these “2021 AAHA/AAFP Feline Life Stage Guidelines”, the Task Force offers evidence-guided recommendations  
for eight clinical aspects of feline medicine that should be managed in relation to a cat’s life stage: behavior and 
environmental needs; elimination; nutrition and weight management; oral health; parasite control; vaccination; 
zoonoses and human safety; and diagnostics.  
< Additionally, important topics include feline-friendly handling practices, overcoming barriers to examination visits, 
environmental enrichment, understanding feline behavior, practice team training, and client education.  
< Integrating clinical management with appropriate patient handling, and practice team and client collaboration,  
all tailored to the cat’s life stage, forms the basis for an effective, individualized healthcare strategy that  
can be applied throughout the feline patient’s lifetime.
SUMMARY points
 
JFMS CLINICAL PRACTICE  229
S P E C I A L  ARticle /  2021 AAHA/AAFP feline life stage guidelines
 
Acknowledgments 
 
The Task Force gratefully acknowledges the contribution of  
Mark Dana of Scientific Communications Services, LLC, and the 
Kanara Consulting Group, LLC, in the preparation of the guide‑
lines manuscript.  
 
Conflict of interest 
 
Hazel C Carney has received speaking fees from Royal Canin. 
Jessica Quimby is a consultant/key opinion leader for Boehringer 
Ingelheim Animal Health USA Inc., Dechra Veterinary Products, 
Elanco Animal Health, Hill’s Pet Nutrition, Inc., IDEXX 
Laboratories, Inc., Kindred Biosciences, Inc., Nestlé Purina 
Petcare, and Royal Canin. Jodi Westropp has received speaking 
fees from Bayer Animal Health, Nestlé Purina Petcare, Hill’s  
Pet Nutrition, Inc., and Royal Canin; served as a consultant/ 
key opinion leader for Nestlé Purina Petcare; and served on the  
academic board for the International School of Veterinary 
Postgraduate Studies. The other members of the Task Force have 
no conflicts of interest to declare. 
  
Funding  
 
Boehringer Ingelheim Animal Health USA Inc., CareCredit, Dechra 
Veterinary Products, Hill’s Pet Nutrition, Inc., IDEXX Laboratories, 
Inc., Merck Animal Health, and Zoetis Petcare supported the devel‑
opment of the “2021 AAHA/AAFP Feline Life Stage Guidelines” 
and resources through an educational grant to AAHA. 
 
Ethical approval  
 
This work did not involve the use of animals and, therefore, ethi‑
cal approval was not specifically required for publication. 
 
Informed consent 
 
This work did not involve the use of animals and, therefore, 
informed consent was not required. For any animals individually 
identifiable within this publication, informed consent (either  
verbal or written) for their use in the publication was obtained 
from the people involved. 
 
References 
 
1
Flanigan J, Shepherd A, Majchrzak S, et al. US pet ownership 
and demographics sourcebook. Schaumburg, IL: American 
Veterinary Medical Association, 2007, pp 1–3. 
2
Lue TW, Pantenburg DP and Crawford PM. Impact of the 
owner–pet and client–veterinarian bond on the care that 
pets receive. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008; 232: 531–540. 
3
Volk JO, Felsted KE, Thomas JG, et al. Executive summary of 
the Bayer veterinary care usage study. J Am Vet Med Assoc 
2011; 238: 1275–1282. 
4
Bishop G, Cooney K, Cox S, et al. 2016 AAHA/IAAHPC end-
of-life care guidelines. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2016; 52: 
341–356. 
5
AAFP. 2021 AAFP End of Life Online Educational Toolkit. 
Available at: catvets.com/endoflife. 
6
Hoyumpa Vogt A, Rodan I, Brown M, et al. AAFP–AAHA 
feline life stage guidelines. J Feline Med Surg 2010; 12:  
43–54. 
7
Stone AE, Brummet GO, Carozza EM, et al. 2020 
AAHA/AAFP feline vaccination guidelines. J Feline Med 
Surg 2020; 22: 813–830. 
8
Rodan I, Sundahl E, Carney H, et al. AAFP and ISFM feline-
friendly handling guidelines. J Feline Med Surg 2011; 13: 
364–375. 
9
Carney HC, Little S, Brownlee-Tomasso D, et al. AAFP and 
ISFM feline-friendly nursing care guidelines. J Feline Med 
Surg 2012; 14: 337–349. 
10 AAFP. AAFP Cat Friendly Certificate Program. Available at: 
catvets.com/certificate.  
11 AAFP. Cat Friendly Practices. Available at: catvets.com/cfp. 
12 Pittari J, Rodan I, Beekman G, et al. American Association of 
Feline Practitioners. Senior care guidelines. J Feline Med Surg 
2009; 11: 763–778.  
13 AAFP Position Statement. Early spay and castration. 
Available at: catvets.com/public/PDFs/PositionStatements/ 
EarlySpay&Neuter.pdf.  
14 AAFP. Client brochures for cat owners. How do I know if 
my cat is in pain? Available at: https://catvets.com/guide-
lines/client-brochures.  
15 Gough A, Thomas A and O’Neill D. Part II: cat breeds.  
In: Gough A, Thomas A and O’Neill D (eds). Breed predispo-
sitions to disease in dogs and cats. 3rd ed. Chichester, UK: 
John Wiley & Sons, 2018, pp 225–255. 
16 Hosie MJ, Addie DD, Boucraut-Baralon C, et al. Matrix  
vaccination guidelines: 2015 ABCD recommendations for 
indoor/outdoor cats, rescue shelter cats and breeding catter-
ies. J Feline Med Surg 2015; 17: 583–587. 
17 Lappin MR, Elston T, Evans L, et al. 2019 AAFP feline 
zoonoses guidelines. J Feline Med Surg 2019; 21: 1008–1021. 
18 Little S, Levy J, Hartmann K, et al. 2020 AAFP feline retro-
virus testing and management guidelines. J Feline Med Surg 
2020; 22: 5–30. 
19 Sadek T, Hamper B, Horwitz D, et al. Feline feeding pro-
grams: addressing behavioral needs to improve feline 
health and wellbeing. J Feline Med Surg 2018; 20: 1049–1055. 
AAFP Consensus Statement available at: catvets.com/ 
guidelines/practice-guidelines/how-to-feed. 
20 AAHA. Body condition scoring (BCS) systems. Available at: 
aaha.org/globalassets/02-guidelines/weight-management/ 
weightmgmt_bodyconditionscoring.pdf.  
21 Whyte A, Gracia A, Bonastre C, et al. Oral disease and micro-
biota in free-roaming cats. Top Companion Anim Med 2017; 32: 
91–95. 
22 Whyte A, Lacasta S, Whyte J, et al. Tooth resorption in 
Spanish domestic cats: preliminary data. Top Companion 
Anim Med 2020; 38: 100369. DOI: 10.1016/j.tcam.2019.100369. 
23 Bennett D, Ariffin SMZ and Johnston P. Osteoarthritis in the 
cat: how common is it and how easy to recognise? J Feline 
Med Surg 2012; 14: 65–75. 
24 AAHA. 2010 AAHA nutritional assessment guidelines  
for dogs and cats. Available at: aaha.org/aaha-guidelines/ 
nutritional-assessment-configuration/nutritional-assessment-
introduction/.  
25 Purina. Fecal Scoring Chart. Available at: https://www. 
proplanveterinarydiets.ca/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/ 
180107_PPPVD-Fecal-Scoring-Chart-UPDATE-EN-FINAL. pdf.  
26 Royal Canin. Fecal Scoring System for Cats. 2020.  
Available at: https://royalcanin-us.my.salesforce.com/sfc/p/ 
j0000001rD9A/a/5b000000QMW8/8FRFiG8lTxRVN0rrLvXH
rb9shSxH3cqoC.XA.ltJj2s. 
 230 JFMS CLINICAL PRACTICE
S P E C I A L  ARticle /  2021 AAHA/AAFP feline life stage guidelines
27 Rozanski E. Feline lower airway disease. In: Little S (ed). 
August’s consultations in feline internal medicine. 7th ed.  
St Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2016, pp 447–451. 
28 Epstein ME, Rodan I, Griffenhagen G, et al. 2015 
AAHA/AAFP pain management guidelines for dogs and 
cats. J Feline Med Surg 2015; 17: 251–272. 
29 Taylor SS, Sparkes AH, Briscoe K, et al. ISFM consensus 
guidelines on the diagnosis and management of hyperten-
sion in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2017; 19: 288–303. 
30 Reid J, Scott EM, Calvo G, et al. Definitive Glasgow acute 
pain scale for cats: validation and intervention level. Vet Rec 
2017; 180: 449. DOI: 10.1136/vr.104208. 
31 Kunder D and Foster J. Cutaneous manifestations of internal 
disease. In: Little S (ed). August’s consultations in feline inter-
nal medicine. 7th ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2016, pp 282–294.  
32 Hammerle M, Horst C, Levine E, et al. 2015 AAHA canine 
and feline behavior management guidelines. J Am Anim 
Hosp Assoc 2015; 51: 205–221. Available at: https:// 
www.aaha.org/behavior. 
33 Carney HC, Sadek TP, Curtis TM, et al. AAFP and ISFM 
guidelines for diagnosing and solving house-soiling behav-
ior in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2014; 16: 579–598. 
34 Casey RA, Vandenbussche S, Bradshaw JWS, et al.  
Reasons for relinquishment and return of domestic cats 
(Felis silvestris catus) to rescue shelters in the UK. 
Anthrozoos 2009; 22: 347–358. 
35 Overall KL, Rodan I, Beaver B, et al. Feline behavior guide-
lines from the American Association of Feline Practitioners. 
2004. Available 
at: 
catvets.com/public/PDFs/Practice 
Guidelines/FelineBehaviorGLS.pdf. 
36 Estes RD. The behavior guide to African mammals. Berkeley, 
CA: University of California Press, 1991, pp 349–357. 
37 Landsberg G, Hunthausen W and Ackerman L. Feline devel-
opment. In: Behavior problems of the dog and cat. 3rd ed. 
Saunders, Elsevier, 2013, pp 20–23. 
38 Ellis SLH, Rodan I, Carney HC, et al. AAFP and ISFM feline 
environmental needs guidelines. J Feline Med Surg 2013; 15: 
219–230. 
39 AVMA. AVMA pet ownership and demographics source-
book. 2017–2018 edition. Executive summary available at: 
https://www.avma.org/sites/default/files/resources/AVMA- 
Pet-Demographics-Executive-Summary.pdf. 
40 Elzerman AL, DePorter TL, Beck A, et al. Conflict and affil-
iative behavior frequency between cats in multi-cat house-
holds: a survey-based study. J Feline Med Surg 2020; 22: 
705–717. 
41 Bradshaw J. What is a cat, and why can cats become  
distressed? In: Sparkes A and Ellis S (eds). ISFM guide to feline 
stress and health: managing negative emotions to improve 
feline health and wellbeing. Tisbury, UK: ISFM, 2016, pp 19–30. 
42 Overall KL. Manual of clinical behavioral medicine for dogs 
and cats. St Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2013. 
43 Turner D and Bateson P. The domestic cat: the biology of its 
behavior. 2nd ed. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press, 2008, pp 13–17. 
44 Reisner IR, Houpt KA, Erb HN, et al. Friendliness to humans 
and defensive aggression in cats: the influence of handling 
and paternity. Physiol Behav 1994; 55: 1119–1124. 
45 Rodan I and Heath S. Feline behavioral health and welfare.  
St Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2016, p 331. 
46 Collard RR. Fear of strangers and play behavior in kittens 
with varied social experience. Child Dev 1967; 38: 877–891. 
47 Caro TM. Predatory behaviour and social play in kittens. 
Behaviour 1981; 76: 1–24. 
48 Humphrey T, Proops L, Forman J, et al. The role of cat  
eye narrowing movements in cat–human communication. 
Sci Rep 2020; 10: 16503. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-73426-0. 
49 Yin S. Low stress handling, restraint and behavior modification 
of dogs and cats. Davis, CA: CattleDog Publishing, 2009, p 422. 
50 Koch CS. Teaching your pet to take medication. Available at: 
https://www.lincolnlandac.com/sites/site-1900/documents/ 
Medicating%20your%20pet2.10.14.pdf.  
51 AAFP. Claw counseling: helping clients live alongside cats 
with claws. Available at: catvets.com/public/PDFs/ 
PositionStatements/Scratching/Claw-Counseling.pdf. 
52 Wilson C, Bain M, DePorter T, et al. Owner observations 
regarding cat scratching behavior: an internet-based survey. 
J Feline Med Surg 2016; 18: 791–797. 
53 AAFP. Claw Friendly Educational Toolkit. Available at: 
catvets.com/clawfriendly. 
54 Hart BL and Barrett RE. Effects of castration on fighting, 
roaming and urine spraying in adult male cats. J Am Vet Med 
Assoc 1973; 163: 290–292. 
55 Borchelt PL. Cat elimination behavior problems. Vet Clin 
North Am Small Anim Pract 1991; 21: 257–264. 
56 Nielson J. Thinking outside the box: feline elimination.  
J Feline Med Surg 2004; 6: 5–11. 
57 Neilson JC. The latest scoop on litter. Vet Med 2009; 104: 
140–144. Available at: www.dvm360.com/view/latest-scoop-
litter. 
58 Horwitz DF. Behavioral and environmental factors associat-
ed with elimination behavior problems in cats: a retrospec-
tive study. Appl Anim Behav Sci 1997; 52: 129–137. 
59 AAFP Position Statement. Impact of lifestyle choice on the 
companion cat: indoor vs outdoor. 2016. Available at: 
catvets.com/public/PDFs/Content/Preview/LifestyleChoice 
PositionStatement.pdf. 
60 Buffington CAT. External and internal influences on  
disease risk in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2002; 220: 994–1002. 
Available at: https://avmajournals.avma.org/doi/abs/ 
10.2460/javma.2002.220.994. 
61 Rochlitz I. A review of the housing requirements of domes-
tic cats (Felis silvestris catus) kept in the home. Appl Anim 
Behav Sci 2005; 93: 97–109. 
62 Clancy EA, Moore AS and Bertone ER. Evaluation of cat and 
owner characteristics and their relationships to outdoor 
access of owned cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2003; 222: 
1541–1545. 
63 Neville PF. An ethical viewpoint: the role of veterinarians 
and behaviourists in ensuring good husbandry for cats.  
J Feline Med Surg 2004; 6: 43–48. 
64 Toribio JLM, Norris JM, White JD, et al. Demographics and 
husbandry of pet cats living in Sydney, Australia: results of 
cross-sectional survey of pet ownership. J Feline Med Surg 
2009; 11: 449–461. 
65 Rochlitz I. The welfare of cats. Dordrecht, Netherlands: 
Springer, 2005. 
66 Clarke DL, Wrigglesworth D, Holmes K, et al. Using envi-
ronmental enrichment and feeding enrichment to facilitate 
feline weight loss. J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr (Berl) 2005; 89: 
427. DOI: 10.1111/j.1439-0396.2005.00611_1.x. 
67 AAFP Position Statement. Positive reinforcement for cats. 
2012. Available at: catvets.com/public/PDFs/Position 
Statements/PositiveReinforcement.pdf. 
 
JFMS CLINICAL PRACTICE  231
S P E C I A L  ARticle /  2021 AAHA/AAFP feline life stage guidelines
68 DePorter TL. Use of pheromones in feline practice. In: 
Rodan I and Heath S (eds). Feline behavioral health and  
welfare. St Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2015, pp 235–244. 
69 Griffith CA, Steigerwald ES and Buffington CA. Effects of 
synthetic facial pheromone on behavior of cats. J Am Vet Med 
Assoc 2000; 217: 1154–1156. 
70 Stevens BJ, Frantz EM, Orlando JM, et al. Efficacy of a single 
dose of trazodone hydrochloride given to cats prior to vet-
erinary visits to reduce signs of transport- and examination-
related anxiety. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2016; 249: 202–208. 
71 van Haaften KA, Eichstadt Forsythe LR, Stelow EA, et al. 
Effects of a single preappointment dose of gabapentin on 
signs of stress in cats during transportation and veterinary 
examination. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2017; 251: 1175–1181. 
72 Lascelles BDX, Henry JB 3rd, Brown J, et al. Cross-sectional 
study of the prevalence of radiographic degenerative joint 
disease in domesticated cats. Vet Surg 2010; 39: 535–544. 
73 Gerard AF, Larson M, Baldwin CJ, et al. Telephone survey to 
investigate relationships between onychectomy or onychec-
tomy technique and house soiling in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 
2016; 249: 638–643. 
74 Ellis JJ, McGowan RTS and Martin F. Does previous use 
affect litter box appeal in multi-cat households? Behav 
Processes 2017; 141: 284–290. 
75 Guy NC, Hopson M and Vanderstichel R. Litterbox size pref-
erence in domestic cats (Felis catus). J Vet Behav 2014; 9: 
78–82. 
76 Grigg EK, Pick L and Nibblett B. Litter box preference in 
domestic cats: covered versus uncovered. J Feline Med Surg 
2013; 15: 280–284. 
77 Horwitz DF. Common feline problem behaviors: urine 
spraying. J Feline Med Surg 2019; 21: 209–219. 
78 Cafazzo S, Bonanni R and Natoli E. Neutering effects on 
social behaviour of urban unowned free-roaming domestic 
cats. Animals (Basel) 2019; 9. DOI: 10.3390/ani9121105. 
79 Buffington CA, Chew DJ, Kendall MS, et al. Clinical evalua-
tion of cats with nonobstructive urinary tract diseases. J Am 
Vet Med Assoc 1997; 210: 46–50. 
80 Buffington CAT, Westropp JL, Chew DJ, et al. Clinical evalu-
ation of multimodal environmental modification (MEMO) 
in the management of cats with idiopathic cystitis. J Feline 
Med Surg 2006; 8: 261–268.  
81 Westropp JL and Buffington CAT. Feline idiopathic cystitis: 
current understanding of pathophysiology and manage-
ment. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2004; 34:  
1043–1055. 
82 Bradshaw JWS. The evolutionary basis for the feeding 
behavior of domestic dogs (Canis familiaris) and cats (Felis 
catus). J Nutr 2006; 136 Suppl 7: 1927S–1931S. 
83 Morris JG. Idiosyncratic nutrient requirements of cats 
appear to be diet-induced evolutionary adaptations. Nutr 
Res Rev 2002; 15: 153–168. 
84 AAHA. 
Raw 
protein 
diet. 
2011. 
Available 
at: 
https://www.aaha.org/about-aaha/aaha-position-state-
ments/raw-protein-diet/.  
85 Freeman L, Becvarova I, Cave N, et al. WSAVA nutritional 
assessment guidelines. J Feline Med Surg 2011; 13: 516–525. 
Also available at: https://wsava.org/wp-content/uploads/ 
2020/01/WSAVA-Nutrition-Assessment-Guidelines-2011-
JSAP.pdf. 
86 Stasiak M. The development of food preferences in cats:  
the new direction. Nutr Neurosci 2002; 5: 221–228. 
87 Turner DC. The human–cat relationship. In: Turner DC and 
Bateson P (eds). The domestic cat: the biology of its behaviour. 
2nd ed. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2008, 
pp 194–206. 
88 Masserman JH. Experimental neuroses. Sci Am 1950; 182: 38. 
89 Fascetti AJ and Delaney SJ (eds). Applied veterinary clinical 
nutrition. Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons, 2012. 
90 Wichert B, Muller L, Gebert S, et al. Additional data on energy 
requirements of young adult cats measured by indirect 
calorimetry. J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr (Berl) 2007; 91: 278–281. 
91 Laflamme D. Development and validation of a body condition 
score system for cats: a clinical tool. Feline Pract 1997; 25: 13–18. 
92 Teng KT, McGreevy PD, Toribio J-A, et al. Strong associations 
of nine-point body condition scoring with survival and 
lifespan in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2018; 20: 1110–1118. 
93 Lund EM, Armstrong PJ and Kirk CK. Prevalence and risk 
factors for obesity in adult cats from private US veterinary 
practices. Int J Appl Res Vet Med 2005; 3: 88–96. 
94 Scarlett JM and Donohue S. Associations between body  
condition and disease in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1998; 212: 
1725–1731. 
95 Segev G, Livne H, Ranen E, et al. Urethral obstruction in cats: 
predisposing factors, clinical, clinicopathological character-
istics and prognosis. J Feline Med Surg 2011; 13: 101–108. 
96 Scarlett JM, Donoghue S, Saidla J, et al. Overweight cats: 
prevalence and risk factors. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord 1994; 
18 Suppl 1: S22–28. 
97 Courcier EA, Mellor DJ, Pendlebury E, et al. An investigation 
into the epidemiology of feline obesity in Great Britain: 
results of a cross-sectional study of 47 companion animal 
practises. Vet Rec 2012; 171: 560. DOI: 10.1136/vr.100953. 
98 Baldwin K, Barges J, Buffington T, et al. AAHA nutritional 
assessment guidelines for dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp 
Assoc 2010; 46: 285–296. Also available at: https://www.aaha. 
org/globalassets/02-guidelines/nutritional-assessment/ 
nutritionalassessmentguidelines.pdf. 
99 National Research Council. Nutrient requirements of dogs 
and cats. Washington DC: National Academies Press, 2006. 
100 Thatcher CD, Hand MS and Remillard RL. Small animal  
clinical nutrition: an iterative process. In: Hand MS, 
Thatcher CD, Remillard RL, et al (eds). Small animal clinical 
nutrition. 5th ed. Topeka, KS: Mark Morris Institute; 2010, pp 
3–21. Available at: https://s3.amazonaws.com/mmi_sacn5/ 
2019/SACN5_1.pdf. 
101 Miele A, Sordo L and Gunn-Moore DA. Feline aging:  
promoting physiologic and emotional well-being. Vet Clin 
North Am Small Anim Pract 2020; 50: 719–748. 
102 Laflamme DP. Nutrition for aging cats and dogs and the 
importance of body condition. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim 
Pract 2005; 35: 713–742. 
103 Harper EJ. Changing perspectives on aging and energy 
requirements: aging, body weight and body composition in 
humans, dogs and cats. J Nutr 1998; 128 Suppl 12: 
2627S–2631S. 
104 Cupp C, Perez-Camargo G, Patil A, et al. Long-term food con-
sumption and body weight changes in a controlled popula-
tion of geriatric cats [abstract]. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 
2004; 26 Suppl: 60. 
105 Laflamme D. Effect of diet on loss and preservation of lean 
body mass in aging dogs and cats. In: Proceedings of the 
Companion Animal Nutrition Summit; May 3–5, 2018; 
Charleston, SC, pp 41–46. 
 232 JFMS CLINICAL PRACTICE
S P E C I A L  ARticle /  2021 AAHA/AAFP feline life stage guidelines
106 Hall JA, MacLeay J, Yerramilli M, et al. Positive impact of 
nutritional interventions on serum symmetric dimethylargi-
nine and creatinine concentrations in client-owned geriatric 
cats. PLOS One 2016; 11: e0153654. DOI: 10.1371/journal. 
pone.0153654. 
107 Bellows J, Berg ML, Dennis S, et al. 2019 AAHA dental care 
guidelines for dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2019; 55: 
49–69. Available at: https://www.aaha.org/globalassets/02-
guidelines/dental/aaha_dental_guidelines.pdf. 
108 Milella L. Occlusion and malocclusion in the cat – what’s 
normal, what’s not and when’s the best time to intervene?  
J Feline Med Surg 2015; 17: 5–20. 
109 Veterinary 
Oral 
Health 
Council. 
VOHC 
Accepted 
 
Products for Cats. Available at: http://www.vohc.org/ 
VOHCAcceptedProductsTable_Cats.pdf. Updated March 
2020. 
110 AAFP. Cat Friendly Homes. How to care for your cat’s teeth. 
Available at: https://catfriendly.com/cat-care-at-home/ 
routine-caregrooming/care-cats-teeth.  
111 AAFP. Cat Friendly Homes. How to brush your cat’s teeth. 
Available at: https://catfriendly.com/cat-care-at-home/ 
routine-caregrooming/how-to-brush-your-cats-teeth.  
112 Bellows J, Center S, Daristotle L, et al. Aging in cats: common 
physical and functional changes. J Feline Med Surg 2016; 18: 
533–550. 
113 Gorrel C, Inskeep G and Inskeep T. Benefits of a ‘dental 
hygiene chew’ on the periodontal health of cats. J Vet Dent 
1998; 15: 135–138. 
114 Logan EI, Berg ML, Coffman L, et al. Dietary control of feline 
gingivitis: results of a six-month study. In: Proceedings of 
the 13th Annual Veterinary Dental Forum; October 21–24, 
1999; Baltimore, MD. 
115 Clarke DE and Caiafa A. Oral examination in the cat:  
a systematic approach. J Feline Med Surg 2014; 16: 873–886. 
116 Perry R and Tutt C. Peridontal disease in cats: back to basics 
– with an eye on the future. J Feline Med Surg 2015; 17: 45–65. 
117 American Veterinary Dental College. Position statement. 
Companion animal dental scaling without anesthesia. 2004. 
Available at: https://avdc.org/?s=Dental+scaling+with-
out+anesthesia.  
118 American Veterinary Dental College. Anesthesia free den-
tistry: know the facts. Available at: http://avdc.org/AFD/.  
119 Burns K. Below the surface of anesthesia-free dentistry.  
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2016; 248: 242–258. Available at: https:// 
www.avma.org/javma-news/2016-02-01/below-surface- 
anesthesia-free-dentistry. 
120 Companion Animal Parasite Council. CAPC Guidelines. 
Available at: http://capcvet.org/guidelines.  
121 AAFP. Cat Friendly Homes. Keep your cat healthy – parasite 
prevention. Available at: https://catfriendly.com/keep-your-
cat-healthy/parasite-prevention.  
122 Coin G. After 4 painful years, CNY woman’s mystery illness 
finally traced to rare tick-borne bacteria. Syracuse.com. 
Available at: https://www.syracuse.com/health/2019/12/ 
after-four-painful-years-a-cny-womansmystery-illness- 
finally-solved.html.  
123 Sonenshine DE. Range expansion of tick disease vectors  
in North America: implications for spread of tick-borne  
disease. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2018; 15: E478.  
DOI: 10.3390/ijerph15030478. 
124 TVP. The state of heartworm incidence in the U.S.  
Today’s Veterinary Practice. Available at: https://todays 
veterinarypractice.com/the-state-of-heartworm-incidence-in-
the-united-states/.  
125 American Heartworm Society. Current feline guidelines for 
the prevention, diagnosis, and management of heartworm 
(Dirofilaria immitis) infection in cats. 2014. Available at: 
https://d3ft8sckhnqim2.cloudfront.net/images/pdf/2014-
AHS-Feline-Guidelines.pdf?1425399092. 
126 Day MJ, Horzinek MC, Schultz RD, et al. WSAVA guidelines 
for the vaccination of dogs and cats. J Small Anim Pract 2016; 
57: E1–45. Available at: https://wsava.org/wp-content/ 
uploads/2020/01/WSAVA-Vaccination-Guidelines-2015.pdf. 
127 Vaccine-Associated Feline Sarcoma Task Force. The current 
understanding and management of vaccine-associated  
sarcomas in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2005; 226: 1821–1842. 
128 CDC. Healthy pets, healthy people. Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/ 
healthypets/index.html.  
129 Stull JW, Bjorvik E, Bub J, et al. 2018 AAHA infection control, 
prevention, and biosecurity guidelines. J Am Anim Hosp 
Assoc 2018; 54: 297–326. Available at: https://www.aaha.org/ 
biosecurity.  
130 van Bree FPJ, Bokken GCAM, Mineur R, et al. Zoonotic  
bacteria and parasites found in raw meat-based diets for 
cats and dogs. Vet Rec 2018; 182: 50. DOI: 10.1136/vr.104535. 
131 Carney HC, Ward CR, Bailey SJ, et al. 2016 AAFP guidelines 
for the management of feline hyperthyroidism. J Feline Med 
Surg 2016; 18: 400–416. 
132 Sparkes AH, Caney S, Chalhoub S, et al. ISFM consensus 
guidelines on the diagnosis and management of feline 
chronic kidney disease. J Feline Med Surg 2016; 18: 219–239. 
133 Behrend E, Holford A, Lathan P, et al. 2018 AAHA diabetes 
management guidelines for dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp 
Assoc 2018; 54: 1–21. Available at: https://www.aaha.org/ 
diabetes. 
134 AAFP. 2019 Diabetes Educational Toolkit. Available at: 
catvets.com/diabetes.  
135 Sparkes AH, Cannon M, Church D, et al. ISFM consensus 
guidelines on the practical management of diabetes melli-
tus in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2015; 17: 235–250. 
136 AAFP. 2021 Hypertension Educational Toolkit. Available at: 
catvets.com/hypertension.  
137 Acierno MJ, Brown S, Coleman AE, et al. ACVIM consensus 
statement: guidelines for the identification, evaluation, and 
management of systemic hypertension in dogs and cats.  
J Vet Intern Med 2018; 32: 1803–1822.  
138 Fox PR, Rush JE, Reynolds CA, et al. Multicenter evaluation 
of plasma N-terminal probrain natriuretic peptide (NT-pro 
BNP) as a biochemical screening test for asymptomatic 
(occult) cardiomyopathy in cats. J Vet Intern Med 2011; 25: 
1010–1016.
Available online at jfms.com and catvets.com/life-stage
Article reuse guidelines: sagepub.co.uk/journals-permissions 
 
JFMS CLINICAL PRACTICE  233
S P E C I A L  ARticle /  2021 AAHA/AAFP feline life stage guidelines
A p p e n d i x :  C l i e n t  b r o c h u r e
Your Cat’s Life Stages
Download in 
easy-to-print 
brochure formats at
www.catvets.com/
guidelines/
client-brochures.
Additional supplemental resources for the Life Stage Guidelines can be found at catvets.com/life-stage
The client brochure may be downloaded from catvets.com/life-stage and catfriendly.com/life-stage, and is also available as supplementary material  
at jfms.com. DOI: 10.1177/1098612X21993657
