JAVMA, Vol 243, No. 11, December 1, 2013 
Vet Med Today: Timely Topics in Nutrition 
1549
T
he feeding of RMBDs to dogs and cats has received 
increasing attention in recent years. The American 
Animal Hospital Association,1 AVMA,2 and Canadian 
Veterinary Medical Association3 have adopted statements 
discouraging the inclusion of raw or undercooked animal-
source protein in dog and cat diets. The Delta Society’s Pet 
Partners Program expressed concern that pets in a therapy 
animal program could be shedding pathogens in the pres-
ence of immunocompromised humans and other at-risk 
human populations. Therefore, they adopted in 2010 a 
policy that precludes animals that eat RMBDs from par-
ticipating in their therapy animal program.4 For each of 
the organizations, the primary reason indicated to oppose 
feeding of an RMBD was that potential pathogen contami-
nation of the uncooked meat causes health risks to the pet 
fed the diet as well as to other pets, human family mem-
bers, and members of the public in contact with the pet. 
These statements did not address other potential prob-
lems of RMBDs, such as potential nutritional imbalances 
or other safety issues of the diets (eg, feeding bones); they 
also did not address the reasons people want to feed these 
diets or potential beneﬁts of this type of diet.
A major problem in the discussion about potential risks 
and beneﬁts of RMBDs is the paucity of good data from high-
quality studies. Information on nutritional risk or beneﬁt is 
often from low-quality studies (testimonials, case series, or 
poor-quality cohort and case-controlled studies).5 The evi-
dence for infectious disease risks when feeding RMBDs is of 
better quality and quantity, but few studies have been con-
ducted to compare the risk of feeding RMBDs with that of 
feeding commercial foods,6 and no reports have been pub-
lished on evaluation of the long-term risks and beneﬁts of 
feeding RMBDs. The lack of consensus and paucity of good 
data can make it difﬁcult for veterinarians to provide in-
formed feeding recommendations to dog and cat owners. 
Current knowledge about the risks and beneﬁts 
of raw meat–based diets for dogs and cats
Lisa M. Freeman, DVM, PhD, DACVN; Marjorie L. Chandler, DVM, MS, DACVN, DACVIM;  
Beth A. Hamper, DVM, PhD, DACVN; Lisa P. Weeth, DVM, DACVN
The intent of the information reported here is 
to provide a balanced review of the issue of feeding 
RMBDs, types of RMBDs, reasons these diets are fed, 
and potential beneﬁts and risks associated with feeding 
of RMBDs. The information will also highlight areas in 
which additional research is needed to better delineate 
beneﬁts and risks. 
Deﬁnition of RMBDs
Raw meat–based diets are those that include un-
cooked ingredients derived from domesticated or wild-
caught food animal species and that are fed to dogs or 
cats living in home environments. These ingredients can 
include skeletal muscles, internal organs, and bones from 
mammals, ﬁsh, or poultry as well as unpasteurized milk 
and uncooked eggs. Raw meat–based diets can be divided 
into 2 main categories: commercial and home-prepared. 
The most common forms of commercial RMBDs 
are fresh, frozen, and freeze-dried diets intended to be 
nutritionally complete and balanced. These diets are of-
ten formulated to meet values listed in the AAFCO Dog 
or Cat Food Nutrient Proﬁles, and individual diets may 
meet values listed for adult maintenance, growth and 
gestation-lactation, or all life stages. However, some of 
these foods may be labeled as intended for intermittent 
or supplemental feeding only, which means that they 
are not nutritionally complete and balanced. Commer-
cial RMBDs typically are created from recipes devel-
oped by or for a company marketing a speciﬁc brand 
of pet food; these commercial RMBDs are made in large 
quantities in pet food manufacturing facilities or in-
dustrial kitchens, then packaged into smaller volumes 
for purchase and feeding by pet owners. In addition to 
the fresh, frozen, and freeze-dried commercial diets, 
another less common form of RMBD is a carbohydrate 
premix that includes grains, vitamins, and minerals and 
is intended to have a raw meat protein source added by 
the pet owner to provide a complete diet. 
Timely Topics in Nutrition
ABBREVIATIONS
AAFCO  
Association of American Feed Control Ofﬁcials
BARF 
Biologically appropriate raw food 
RMBD  
Raw meat–based diet
In cooperation with
From the Department of Clinical Sciences, Cummings School of Veteri-
nary Medicine, Tufts University, North Grafton, MA 01536 (Freeman); 
Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies, University of Edinburgh, 
Midlothian, EH25 9RG, Scotland (Chandler); the Department of Small 
Animal Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of 
Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996 (Hamper); and Red Bank Veterinary 
Hospital, 197 Hance Ave, Tinton Falls, NJ 07724 (Weeth). 
The authors thank Drs. Dottie Laﬂamme, Nicholas Cave, and David 
Dzanis for technical assistance.
Address correspondence to Dr. Freeman (lisa.freeman@tufts.edu).
Brought to you by Fox Valley Technical College  | Unauthenticated | Downloaded 07/12/26 03:39 AM UTC
1550 
Vet Med Today: Timely Topics in Nutrition 
JAVMA, Vol 243, No. 11, December 1, 2013
In contrast, home-prepared RMBDs include a va-
riety of highly publicized feeding regimens, such as 
BARF (originally deﬁned as bones and raw food but 
currently referred to as biologically appropriate raw 
food by supporters),7 the Ultimate Diet,8 and the Vol-
hard Diet.9 Published recommendations for feeding of 
RMBDs are typically based on opinion and have not 
been subjected to rigorous peer review. However, a va-
riety of other recipes and programs for home-prepared 
RMBDs have been developed by general practice vet-
erinarians, trainers, breeders, and owners. Many of the 
home-prepared RMBDs include by-products (ie, bones 
and internal organs), even though these ingredients an-
ecdotally appear to be avoided by some owners because 
of misperceptions about what they are (or are not). 
Some commercial foods are now marketed speciﬁcally 
as having no by-products. Also, whereas commercial 
RMBDs are often developed to meet AAFCO nutrient 
guidelines and are intended (when fed exclusively) to 
provide sole-source nutrition for a speciﬁc life stage of 
dogs and cats, home-prepared RMBDs are often based 
on a rotation of ingredients with the belief that this ro-
tational variety will provide (over a prolonged period) 
a complement of essential amino acids, fatty acids, vita-
mins, and minerals to pets.7–9
Finally, there are a variety of raw dried or freeze-
dried pet treats that have bacterial risks similar to those 
for RMBDs. These include products such as rawhide 
chews, pig ears, and cattle hooves that have been com-
mercially available for many years but that have now 
been expanded to include hearts, tracheas, and bull or 
steer penises (eg, bully or pizzle sticks). Most of the 
freeze-dried treats (eg, freeze-dried liver treats) are raw. 
It has been found in multiple studies10–14 that there is 
a substantial risk for contamination of these products 
with Salmonella spp and other bacteria, and outbreaks 
of salmonellosis in humans have been reported.10–12 
These products should also be mentioned when dis-
cussing the issues of risks for raw meat–based products.
Owner Motivation for Feeding RMBDs
Proponents of feeding commercial or home-prepared 
RMBDs often claim nutritional superiority of these diets 
and important health beneﬁts. Many claims of beneﬁts are 
largely unproven and not based on scientiﬁc evidence, but 
they appear plausible to well-intending pet owners who 
want to feed a diet that will optimize health and wellness 
of their pets. Anecdotal beneﬁts for RMBDs include bet-
ter palatability of these diets, cleaner teeth from chewing 
bones as a part of these diets, a shiny coat, and owner 
perception that they are providing their pet with a more 
natural diet.
Furthermore, it may be challenging for owners to 
comprehend the effects of medical procedures, treat-
ments, and disease processes, but provision of food is 
an easily attainable aspect by which they can directly 
inﬂuence the care and well-being of their animals. 
What to feed their pets can be just as important, and 
sometimes more important, than what owners them-
selves eat. Many pet owners care for their animals as 
they would a human family member, and the act of 
feeding for some owners is a way of enhancing and re-
inforcing the human-animal bond. Owners want to do 
what is best for their pets, including feeding their pets 
properly, but the pet food marketplace is confusing and 
complicated with many opposing viewpoints. Some of 
the most passionate arguments surrounding pet health 
and well-being concern the feeding of RMBDs. 
A founding premise in popular lay publications and 
on the Internet regarding RMBDs is that these are the 
diets that wild, nondomesticated dog and cat species ate 
during their evolution into pets, which may provide an 
important rationale for some owners to feed these diets 
to their dogs and cats.7,8 Cats have remained obligate 
carnivores during domestication, and their natural diet 
includes a range of small prey species such as mam-
mals, reptiles, birds, and insects that can be hunted, 
captured, and eaten by the cats. Conversely, dogs have 
adapted to eating an omnivorous diet and can consume 
a variety of plant and animal products to meet their es-
sential nutrient requirements. However, both cats and 
dogs are able to digest and metabolize many nutrients 
provided from plant-based ingredients.15 Additionally, 
dogs have undergone an incredible variety of selection 
pressures resulting in large phenotypic differences from 
their ancestors and among current breeds.16,17 In fact, it 
was reported18 that there are 36 regions of the genome 
that differ between dogs and wolves, 10 of which play a 
critical role in starch digestion and fat metabolism. The 
authors of that study18 conclude that these genetic dif-
ferences in the genome between dogs and wolves and 
hence the ability to digest starch and fat constituted a 
crucial step in the early domestication of dogs. There-
fore, even if the typical diet eaten by a wild, nondo-
mesticated dog or cat can be considered optimal for re-
production and survival in those animals, in which the 
lifespan is typically quite short, these diets may not be 
optimal for domestic dogs and cats living in a home en-
vironment, with owners who anticipate that their pets 
will have long and healthy lives.
The term natural has a speciﬁc deﬁnition accord-
ing to the AAFCO.19 Natural products cannot contain 
chemically synthesized ingredients, except for trace 
nutrients, the presence of which must be declared (eg, 
a label indicating natural with added vitamins, miner-
als, and other trace nutrients). Nonetheless, the term 
natural is used by the pet food industry and pet own-
ers in numerous ways and to imply a variety of proper-
ties. Despite the difﬁculty in use of the term natural, 
some pet owners believe there is a disparity between 
commercial dry extruded and moist diets and RMBDs. 
Some authors have suggested that physical and heat 
processing, rendering, and inclusion of by-products or 
chemically synthesized additives and preservatives are 
unhealthy and, in some cases, may cause disease.7,9,20 
The 2007 pet food recall because of melamine contami-
nation and the associated morbidity and fatalities also 
brought pet food safety to the forefront. Anecdotally, 
there appears to be a growing number of consumers 
who are suspicious of large pet food manufacturers. 
Additionally, recalls of commercial pet foods for bacte-
rial contamination, mycotoxicosis, thiamine deﬁciency, 
and vitamin D toxicosis are evidence that feeding com-
mercial dry extruded and moist pet foods is not com-
pletely without risk.21–25
Brought to you by Fox Valley Technical College  | Unauthenticated | Downloaded 07/12/26 03:39 AM UTC
JAVMA, Vol 243, No. 11, December 1, 2013 
Vet Med Today: Timely Topics in Nutrition 
1551
Finally, proponents of feeding RMBDs claim health 
beneﬁts for the diets, such as improvement in coat and 
skin; elimination of breath, body, and fecal odor; im-
provement in energy, behavior, and immunity; and a 
reduction in medical conditions including allergies, ar-
thritis, pancreatitis, dental disease, and parasitism.7–9,26 
Although changes may be anecdotally reported by pet 
owners and veterinarians, potential health beneﬁts 
have not undergone scientiﬁc evaluation. Investigators 
in a recent study27 found indications of lower calcium 
excretion in urine of dogs eating a commercial RMBD, 
compared with excretion in dogs eating a commercial 
dry extruded diet, which suggested a beneﬁt of RMBDs 
for dogs prone to calcium oxalate urolithiasis. Howev-
er, the RMBD contained half as much calcium, less than 
a third as much sodium, and considerably more water 
than did the dry extruded diet, so it is difﬁcult to inter-
pret the importance of these results. Further research 
regarding all reported health claims is warranted. 
Effects of Cooking on Digestibility
Proponents often claim that one of the beneﬁts of 
RMBDs is increased digestibility because essential en-
zymes are not destroyed by cooking. Although most 
dogs and cats do not require exogenous enzymes, stud-
ies28–30 have found improvements of food digestibility in 
animals fed RMBDs. Digestibility of RMBDs versus dry 
extruded diets was examined in exotic felids.28,29 Inves-
tigators in 1 study29 found that RMBDs had signiﬁcantly 
higher digestibility for crude protein, but not for fat, 
energy, or dry matter. In the other study,28 investigators 
found numerically higher amounts of dry matter, energy, 
and protein in RMBDs, but a statistical comparison was 
not performed. Decreased digestibility in cooked foods 
is believed to be the result of effects of heat processing 
on proteins and amino acids.31–33 A study30 that involved 
domestic cats also found signiﬁcantly higher energy 
(8.0% higher) and macronutrient (4.6% to 14.3% high-
er) digestibility of an RMBD, compared with digestibil-
ity for a dry extruded diet. The modest improvements 
in digestibility for the RMBD, compared with the dry 
extruded diet, may be related to positive effects of the 
RMBD on digestibility, negative effects of extruded diets 
in general, or negative effects of the speciﬁc extruded 
diet used in the study. In that same study30 of domestic 
cats, there was no signiﬁcant difference in digestibility 
between feeding of the RMBD before and after it had 
been heated in a microwave to ≥ 71°C (≥ 160°F). 
Proteins and amino acids undergo substantial 
physical changes during processing associated with 
the manufacture of pet foods. Processing conditions, 
which primarily involve application of heat but also 
can include pressure and water content, can have vari-
able effects on protein digestibility and amino acid 
bioavailability. The effects depend on the ingredients, 
temperature, and type of processing (eg, canning, ex-
trusion used in the production of most commercial dry 
pet foods, and freezing or freeze-drying that would be 
performed with commercial RMBDs). In addition, food 
proteins can react with other food components such as 
sugars, fats, oxidizing agents, acids, alkalies, polyphe-
nols, and food additives. Heat processing during the 
manufacture of dry extruded or moist pet foods typi-
cally results in the denaturing of proteins and loss of 
secondary and tertiary protein structure. Processing 
can increase bioavailability of proteins through col-
lagen breakdown and an increase in exposure to an 
animal’s digestive enzymes, but it also can negatively 
affect amino acids through proteolysis, protein cross-
linking, amino acid racemization, protein-polyphenol 
reactions, oxidative reactions, and browning or Mail-
lard reactions.34 The Maillard reaction accounts for the 
most important losses of amino acids.35 
Although conventional heat processing can have 
negative effects on animal tissue proteins, heat process-
ing improves the bioavailability of some plant proteins 
secondary to denaturing of antinutritional factors. For 
example, legumes contain trypsin and chymotrypsin 
inhibitors that impair protein digestion and reduce pro-
tein bioavailability.36 Heat processing denatures these 
inhibitors and therefore increases protein bioavailability.
Improved digestibility results in less digesta in the 
colon with less fecal matter. Decreased fecal output has 
been found in a study29 of feral cats and in experiments 
conducted by one of the authors (BAH). Decreased fe-
cal output is perceived as a beneﬁt by some owners. Al-
though nondigestible carbohydrates in the form of ﬁber 
are beneﬁcial to the host,37 undigested dietary protein 
results in increased amounts of colonic compounds 
such as ammonia, phenols, indoles, and amines, which 
can play a role in diseases, such as colorectal cancer.38 
The authors are not aware of any reported studies on 
the potential harmful effects of undigested dietary pro-
tein on colonic health in dogs or cats. 
Heterocyclic amines are compounds formed when 
muscle meat is cooked with a high temperature. Ex-
posure to high concentrations (eg, milligram/gram of 
food) of these compounds has been associated with 
cancer in research animals.39 Concentrations found in 
both pet and human foods are much lower (nanograms/
gram of food), but these concentrations still may have 
mutagenic activity.40 The cumulative effects of these 
compounds on genomic instability and increased sensi-
tivity to tumor promotion in pets and humans require 
investigation. 
Another frequently cited beneﬁt when feeding 
RMBDs is an improvement in immune function. In ex-
periments conducted by one of the authors (BAH), do-
mestic cats fed an RMBD for 10 weeks had a signiﬁcant 
increase in lymphocyte and immunoglobulin produc-
tion, whereas there were no signiﬁcant changes over 
the study period for cats fed a cooked commercial moist 
diet. In those experiments, it was also found that cats 
fed the RMBD were fecal shedders of Salmonella spp. 
Higher amounts of exposure to microbes and microbial 
degradation products, exposure to pathogens, changes 
in intestinal microﬂora, or nutritional differences in the 
diets may have stimulated the immune response de-
tected for cats fed the RMBD. However, potential health 
beneﬁts and effects of long-term feeding of RMBDs 
have not been critically evaluated.
Although there is evidence for improved digestibil-
ity of proteins in RMBDs, compared with digestibility of 
proteins in extruded diets, the clinical effects of this dif-
ference are unclear and require further study. Effects of 
Brought to you by Fox Valley Technical College  | Unauthenticated | Downloaded 07/12/26 03:39 AM UTC
1552 
Vet Med Today: Timely Topics in Nutrition 
JAVMA, Vol 243, No. 11, December 1, 2013
processing for some commercial RMBDs (eg, freeze-dried 
or carbohydrate premixes) are also not fully understood. 
In addition, one of the potential effects attributable to 
differences in processing is an alteration of the gastroin-
testinal microbiome. Research is needed on differences 
in the gastrointestinal biome between dogs and cats that 
are fed RMBDs versus extruded foods (and compared 
with results for dogs and cats fed home-cooked diets 
and canned diets as well as effects among various types 
of RMBDs). The function and role of chronic exposure 
to bacteria in metabolism and immune function also 
should be the focus of future studies.
Health Risks
A number of studies have revealed important con-
cerns about nutritional imbalances when RMBDs are 
not formulated properly, health risks to animals, and 
public health concerns.
Health risks to pets—Health risks to pets fed 
RMBDs include nutritional concerns, safety concerns, 
and other health risks.
NUTRITIONAL CONCERNS
A US study41 in 2001 revealed that all of the home-
prepared and commercial RMBDs tested (3 home-pre-
pared and 2 commercial RMBDs) had multiple nutri-
tional imbalances, some of which could have important 
adverse effects on the health of the animals. Examples 
included a calcium-to-phosphorus ratio of 0.20, vita-
min A and E concentrations below the minimum de-
tectable value, and a vitamin D concentration nearly 
twice the AAFCO maximum amount.41 Authors of a 
case report42 of a growing dog fed an RMBD (a com-
mercial carbohydrate premix plus raw ground beef pre-
pared in accordance with instructions on the package 
label) reported that the nutritionally unbalanced diet 
resulted in vitamin D–dependent rickets type I and nu-
tritional secondary hyperparathyroidism. In a recent 
study43 in Europe, investigators calculated amounts of 
12 nutrients (eg, calcium, phosphorus, and vitamin A) 
for 95 homemade RMBDs being fed to dogs, as reported 
by the owners. In that study,43 57 (60%) diets had major 
nutritional imbalances. Therefore, there is concern that 
both commercial and homemade RMBDs may have im-
portant nutrient deﬁciencies and excesses. In addition, 
even if these diets meet the minimum nutrient amounts 
and do not exceed maximum amounts, they may not 
provide an optimal nutrient proﬁle. For example, many 
RMBDs are high in fat, compared with the fat content 
of typical dry extruded or moist pet foods. This may 
improve coat glossiness as perceived by owners, but it 
may also cause mild to severe gastrointestinal issues in 
some animals or increase the risk for obesity in others 
because it is easy to overfeed high-fat diets. 
Whether a pet’s diet includes raw meat or bones, 
there are a number of concerns regarding all home-pre-
pared pet foods. It can be difﬁcult to formulate a nutri-
tionally balanced home-prepared diet. Investigators in 
3 studies44–46 have evaluated the nutritional balance of 
commonly available home-prepared diet recipes. In the 
2 studies44,45 on animals with medical conditions, 94 
recipes were evaluated and none had adequate concen-
trations of all essential nutrients. In one of these stud-
ies,46 investigators evaluated 200 recipes for healthy 
dogs, and 190 (95%) recipes had at least 1 essential nu-
trient below AAFCO minimums and 167 (84%) recipes 
had multiple deﬁciencies.
SAFETY RISKS
In addition to nutritional concerns about RMBDs, 
other safety issues related to RMBDs are of major im-
portance, particularly risks of contamination with 
pathogens.47 Raw meat, whether sold for human con-
sumption, inclusion in commercial RMBDs, or inclu-
sion in dry extruded or moist pet foods, can be con-
taminated with a variety of pathogens. Although care 
is used during processing, meat from healthy food 
animals intended for human consumption may acquire 
bacterial contamination from the hide, feathers, or vis-
cera during slaughter, evisceration, or processing and 
packing.48 A variety of potential pathogens are pres-
ent in raw meat, including meat intended for human 
consumption, with Salmonella spp having received the 
most attention for companion animal species and their 
owners.47,48 Because freezing and freeze-drying do not 
destroy all of these pathogens, both home-prepared and 
commercial RMBDs are at risk of being contaminated 
with these and other pathogens. 
Several reports6,49–53 have been published on the 
presence of Salmonella spp and other pathogens in 
commercial and home-prepared RMBDs. Prevalence 
rates for contamination with Salmonella spp in com-
mercial RMBDs ranged from 20% to 48%.6,50,51 Recently, 
a Salmonella prevalence rate of 21% for 166 commercial 
RMBD samples was reported,51 and 18 Salmonella sero-
types isolated from those samples were resistant to 12 
of 16 antimicrobials tested. It is important to mention 
that commercial dry extruded foods can also become 
contaminated with Salmonella spp and other patho-
gens. For example, there was a pet food recall when 
dry extruded pet foods from a single manufacturing 
plant were linked to 29 human patients identiﬁed with 
Salmonella enterica serovar Schwarzengrund infections 
between 2006 and 2008.54
Home-prepared RMBDs were evaluated in 1 study49 
in which 8 of 10 home-prepared raw chicken–based di-
ets fed to pet dogs had positive results when cultured 
for Salmonella spp, whereas none of the commercial dry 
extruded diets yielded Salmonella spp. In addition, there 
are reports53,55–58 of racing Greyhounds, sled dogs, guard 
dogs, and cats with Salmonella infections attributable to 
consumption of contaminated raw meat, including re-
ports of dogs and cats that died from Salmonella-related 
sepsis. It is not surprising to ﬁnd high rates of contami-
nation with Salmonella spp in home-prepared RMBDs 
because high rates of contamination with Salmonella spp 
can be found for raw meats sold for human consump-
tion. Rates of contamination with Salmonella spp differ 
among studies59–63 but range from 21% to 44% of chick-
en samples purchased from retail locations throughout 
North America. Rates of contamination with Salmonella 
spp are lower for beef and pork intended for human con-
sumption, ranging from 3.5% to 4%.64,65
Contamination of RMBDs with other bacteria and 
pathogens has also been evaluated. Contamination of 
Brought to you by Fox Valley Technical College  | Unauthenticated | Downloaded 07/12/26 03:39 AM UTC
JAVMA, Vol 243, No. 11, December 1, 2013 
Vet Med Today: Timely Topics in Nutrition 
1553
RMBDs with Escherichia coli was evaluated in 2 stud-
ies.6,41 Nontype-speciﬁc E coli was found in 143 of 240 
(60%) commercial RMBDs but in only 8 of 24 (33%) 
commercial dry extruded diets and 2 of 24 (8%) com-
mercial cooked moist diets.6 A 2001 study41 revealed 
that 1 of 5 RMBDs tested (both commercial and home-
prepared diets) was contaminated with E coli O157:H7. 
Investigators in another study50 found a prevalence of 
20% for contamination of commercial RMBDs with 
Clostridium spp. Other health risks indicated in case 
reports or case series of animals eating RMBDs include 
contamination with Campylobacter jejuni52 or Toxoplas-
ma gondii42,66–68 and increased numbers of infections at-
tributable to Echinococcus multilocularis,69 although the 
latter infection was in dogs fed raw viscera from wild 
animals and is geographically limited. Meat intended 
for human consumption is commonly contaminated 
with a variety of pathogens, including Campylobacter 
spp (prevalence of 29% to 74% in chicken)59,60,63 and 
Listeria spp (prevalence of 15% to 34% in chicken and 
25% to 52% in beef and pork)60,63,70 Therefore, home-
prepared RMBDs made with meats intended for human 
consumption are at high risk for contamination and can 
infect both pets and humans. 
Proponents of home-prepared diets, including 
RMBDs, often cite recalls of commercially available 
dry extruded and moist diets because of bacterial and 
chemical contamination as a reason that pets should 
not be fed those types of diets. Contamination of some 
commercial pet foods with melamine-cyanuric acid in 
2007 resulted in dogs and cats with acute kidney in-
jury.71 That episode was caused by the supplier deliber-
ately adulterating a human-grade food ingredient that 
was also used in pet food. In response, in part, to this 
tragedy, the FDA Amendments Act of 2007 was passed 
to strengthen the food recall process, and food safety 
legislation has been further strengthened by the FDA 
Food Safety Modernization Act that went into effect in 
2012.72 A recall is a method of removing or correcting 
consumer products that are in violation of regulations 
administered by the FDA. Although those pieces of leg-
islation grant the FDA mandatory authority to initiate a 
recall in the future, recalls of pet food currently are ini-
tiated voluntarily by a pet food manufacturer, although 
the FDA can request a manufacturer to initiate a recall. 
The FDA Amendments Act of 2007 requires that manu-
facturers submit a report to the FDA no later than 24 
hours after determining that there is a reasonable prob-
ability that the use of or exposure to the food will cause 
serious adverse health consequences to or the death 
of animals (or humans), which constitutes a potential 
class 1 recall.71,72
Of 28 recalls and safety alerts because of conﬁrmed 
or potential contamination of commercially available 
pet foods with Salmonella spp in 2011 and 2012, 17 
were for dry extruded pet foods, 1 was for a raw food 
intended for cats, and 11 were for raw or insufﬁciently 
processed treats, especially raw pig ears.22 The relatively 
low rate of recalls of commercial RMBDs may be be-
cause consumers or veterinarians do not associate ill-
nesses with potential contamination, there is lack of 
rigorous quality-control testing by manufacturers, or 
there is a low prevalence of this feeding regimen in 
the overall pet population and a more limited market 
share for commercial RMBDs than for dry extruded and 
moist cooked diets. It is difﬁcult to make an accurate 
risk assessment from these data because the percentage 
of pet owners who feed RMBDs (commercial or home 
prepared) is not known. Investigators of a 2008 study73 
on the feeding practices of pet owners in Australia and 
the United States found bones or raw foods were pro-
vided as part of the main meal to 16.2% of dogs and 
9.6% of cats, and another 7.4% of dogs and 0.9% of cats 
received raw meat or bones as a treat or snack at least 
once a week. However, it is important to mention that 
these data were collected prior to the pet food recall 
of 2007; thus, these percentages may differ if the sur-
vey were conducted today. In a study14 that involved 
a survey conducted in 2011, 10.8% of 791 pet own-
ers from 44 US states and 6 countries who responded 
fed a commercial or home-prepared RMBD as a major 
component of their pet’s diet, and 32.9% fed a home-
prepared or commercial RMBD as some component of 
their pet’s diet.
Although commercial RMBDs and ingredients are 
covered by FDA regulations and can be recalled if con-
tamination or other problems are detected, the feeding 
of contaminated home-prepared RMBDs that include 
foods intended for human consumption may go unde-
tected because foodborne illnesses in dogs and cats are 
rarely tracked unless associated with human disease. 
There are no data on the number of dogs and cats fed 
human foods that have been recalled, nor the number 
of dogs and cats that have become ill after eating a con-
taminated human food. Although data are available on 
the number of recalls, the lack of data on recalls be-
cause of contamination of commercial and home-pre-
pared RMBDs does not mean that such diets are safe.
To assess the true risks associated with feeding 
RMBDs, research is warranted to provide information 
that will lead to a better understanding of the potential 
health consequences of contamination from RMBDs for 
all those at risk (ie, the dog or cat that eats the food, 
other animals in the household [or in a kennel, cat-
tery, or clinic], and humans exposed to those animals, 
to the RMBDs, and to the animals’ feces). Although the 
gastrointestinal tracts of dogs and cats are shorter in 
comparison with that of humans,74 there is no evidence 
that a shorter gastrointestinal tract prevents infection 
with Salmonella spp or other pathogens. Gastric and 
intestinal pH do not appear to be signiﬁcantly differ-
ent between humans and dogs.75 It is clear that dogs 
and cats can carry Salmonella organisms, but even if 
future studies ﬁnd an increase in resistance to clinical 
salmonellosis, there have been numerous reports53,55–58 
documenting that salmonellosis can occur in both dogs 
and cats. The prevalence of contamination found in the 
studies conducted to date suggests that contamination 
rates of RMBDs are much higher than would be indi-
cated on the basis of the number of recalls, so a better 
understanding of the potential risks is important. 
Some RMBD manufacturers currently use high  
hydrostatic pressure processing (also called high-pres-
sure pasteurization) in an attempt to reduce risks of 
pathogens in commercial RMBDs. Although this pro-
cess can reduce the numbers of many pathogens, it 
Brought to you by Fox Valley Technical College  | Unauthenticated | Downloaded 07/12/26 03:39 AM UTC
1554 
Vet Med Today: Timely Topics in Nutrition 
JAVMA, Vol 243, No. 11, December 1, 2013
usually does not completely eliminate them, and bacte-
ria and viruses differ in their susceptibility to this pro-
cess.76,77 In addition, there is the potential for the devel-
opment of resistance to high-pressure pasteurization by 
bacteria and viruses.77,78 Therefore, further research is 
needed on the efﬁcacy of this processing method for re-
ducing the risk from pathogens in commercial RMBDs. 
Because home-prepared RMBDs are not subject to test-
ing or regulatory oversight, pet owners should be ad-
vised of the risks, from pathogens as well as nutritional 
imbalances, associated with these types of diets. 
OTHER HEALTH ISSUES
In addition to the previously mentioned health prob-
lems, RMBDs that contain bones (eg, the BARF diet) can 
potentially result in fractured teeth and gastrointestinal 
injury. Bones can cause obstruction or perforation of 
the esophagus, stomach, small intestine, or colon. 
Bone foreign bodies were present in 30% to 80% of 
dogs and cats with esophageal foreign bodies.79–82 
Those who promote the feeding of raw bones claim 
that there are fewer problems with raw bones than 
with cooked bones7; however, to our knowledge, the 
frequency of obstruction or perforation with raw ver-
sus cooked bones has not been evaluated. Research is 
needed to better understand the frequency of these 
complications. 
Another potential adverse health effect associated 
with RMBDs was identiﬁed in a recent report.83 Authors 
of that report83 identiﬁed and described 12 dogs with el-
evations in serum thyroxine concentration (6 of which 
had clinical signs of hyperthyroidism) caused by eat-
ing an RMBD. All dogs had thyroxine concentrations 
within the reference range after the diet was changed. 
Even in otherwise healthy dogs and cats eating 
RMBDs, serum biochemical values may deviate from 
laboratory reference ranges. Serum albumin and cho-
lesterol concentrations were higher than the reference 
ranges in cats fed an RMBD, compared with concentra-
tions for those fed dry extruded diets.30 In a studya in 
dogs, those eating an RMBD had signiﬁcantly higher 
concentrations of BUN and serum creatinine and a 
higher Hct, compared with results for control dogs that 
were assumed to be eating commercial dry extruded di-
ets or moist pet food diets. 
Health risks for people—As previously men-
tioned, raw meats, whether intended for consumption 
by humans or pets, are frequently contaminated with 
microorganisms. The most common of these are E coli, 
Salmonella spp, Clostridium spp, Campylobacter spp, 
and Listeria spp.47,59–65,84,85 In addition, raw meats fre-
quently carry parasites such as T gondii and, less fre-
quently, many other parasites that can infect humans 
or pets.48,66–68,86–88 In addition to the health risks these 
pathogens pose for pets, environmental contamination 
caused by shedding of these organisms by pets is a risk 
factor for infection of humans.
It is estimated that salmonellosis affects 1.3 mil-
lion humans/y in the United States, with the cause most 
commonly linked to contaminated poultry products.89 
Salmonella organisms can frequently live as a transient 
member of the intestinal microﬂora without causing ill-
ness; thus, a human or pet can be a carrier. Direct con-
tact with infected or carrier animals or their feces is a 
risk factor for salmonellosis in humans,47,85,89,90 and sev-
eral studies49,57,91,92 have found that dogs eating RMBDs 
are at risk for shedding Salmonella spp in their feces. 
Results of these studies49,57,91,92 indicate that between 
3% and 50% of dogs fed RMBDs intermittently or as a 
primary diet shed Salmonella organisms in their feces. 
The large variation may be related to whether the diets 
were home prepared or commercial and the prevalence 
of contamination of the diets. In 1 study,92 investigators 
found that when a single meal of a contaminated com-
mercial RMBD was fed, 7 of 16 dogs shed Salmonella 
spp in their feces for up to 7 days. 
Other bacteria also can be of concern for humans 
who might be exposed to pets shedding bacteria. In a 
study91 of dogs fed RMBDs over a 1-year period, the 
point prevalence rate for extended-spectrum cepha-
losporinase E coli in the feces was up to 45%. Inves-
tigators in another study93 reported on 16 pathogenic 
Yersinia enterocolitica 4/O:3 isolates cultured from the 
feces of 5 dogs and 2 cats in Finland over a 1-year pe-
riod; 5 of the animals were known to have eaten raw 
pork. Although the authors are not aware of any stud-
ies conducted to evaluate fecal shedding of other E coli 
or Clostridium spp in pets eating raw meats or RMBDs, 
the high prevalence of contamination of raw meats and 
RMBDs makes this of major concern for humans ex-
posed to pets eating these diets. 
Toxoplasma gondii can be acquired from raw or  
undercooked meats or from environmental exposure, 
including contaminated soil or feces. Toxoplasmosis 
is of greatest danger to people with compromised im-
mune function and to pregnant women and the de-
veloping fetus. Toxoplasmosis in a fetus can result in 
mental retardation, blindness, epilepsy, and death. It 
can cause severe encephalitis and death in immuno-
suppressed individuals.94 Although the prevalence of  
T gondii in retail meats sold in the United States is low, 
it is sufﬁcient to induce active toxoplasmosis in cats fed 
raw food samples.68 Toxoplasmosis can be passed from 
cats to humans through exposure to oocysts in the cats’ 
feces. The consumption of raw meat signiﬁcantly in-
creases the seroprevalence of T gondii in cats.95,96 Cats 
that spend time outdoors, hunt prey, or eat raw meat 
are more likely to shed oocysts. Such cats can increase 
the zoonotic risk to their owners, and cats allowed to 
roam and defecate in gardens or sandboxes may pose 
a risk to a broader range of people in the surrounding 
neighborhoods.94
The potential risk for human disease has been 
clearly documented. However, further research is need-
ed to quantify the actual risk and prevalence of disease 
associated with feeding RMBDs to pet dogs and cats. 
Clinical Recommendations
Whether as a means to reinforce the human-animal 
bond or in response to concerns about the production 
of commercial dry extruded and moist diets, commer-
cial and home-prepared RMBDs have grown in popu-
larity over the past decade. Proponents of RMBDs claim 
that they are a safe and natural way to promote ani-
mal wellness; these claims are made without long-term 
supportive evidence and largely ignore the potential 
Brought to you by Fox Valley Technical College  | Unauthenticated | Downloaded 07/12/26 03:39 AM UTC
JAVMA, Vol 243, No. 11, December 1, 2013 
Vet Med Today: Timely Topics in Nutrition 
1555
life-threatening consequences to pets and their human 
caregivers when contaminated RMBDs are fed. 
When comparing various types of RMBDs, some 
general assumptions can be made by veterinary practi-
tioners regarding both commercial and home-prepared 
RMBDs. Fresh, frozen, and freeze-dried raw animal 
products are palatable to both dogs and cats and are 
readily consumed when offered. These types of diets of-
ten include higher amounts of protein and fat, with rela-
tively low total carbohydrate and dietary ﬁber amounts, 
than are typically found in commercial dry extruded 
and moist foods. Pets often consume RMBDs without 
developing any health problems, but sometimes even 
healthy adult dogs and cats can develop adverse effects, 
ranging from relatively benign effects (eg, increased co-
lonic fermentation and gas production with higher pro-
tein intakes) to more overtly life-threatening concerns 
(eg, higher fat diet fed to an animal with a history of 
pancreatitis), as a result of consumption of these diets. 
Additionally, raw meat has an inherent risk of bacterial 
and parasitic contamination, and animals that consume 
RMBDs may pose a risk to other pets and people in 
the household and surrounding community, including 
veterinarians and veterinary support staff. All individu-
als are at risk for infection, but high-risk humans and 
companion animals should be of particular concern. 
This includes those who are ill as well as those who are 
immunocompromised, young, elderly, pregnant, or lac-
tating. Veterinarians may wish to consider instituting 
procedures regarding pets that eat RMBDs to ensure the 
safety of other pets and the veterinary staff. These poli-
cies should take into consideration the potential legal 
implications,97 that there is a period of fecal shedding 
after eating a contaminated RMBD (up to 7 days),92 and 
that common cleaning and disinfection practices do not 
eliminate Salmonella contamination from food bowls.98 
If a commercial RMBD is formulated to meet AAFCO 
nutrient guidelines for a particular life stage (ie, growth-
reproduction or adult maintenance) of a dog or cat, there 
should be minimal risk of nutritional inadequacy. How-
ever, few manufacturers of raw diets conduct AAFCO 
feeding trials or digestibility studies on ﬁnished products, 
and manufacturers differ with regard to their attention to 
quality-control procedures. Thus, the assumption that 
these diets are truly complete and balanced for long-
term feeding relies heavily on the expertise of the indi-
vidual formulating the original recipe and expectations 
about the stability and degradation of dietary nutrients. 
If these diets are manufactured in accordance with cur-
rent FDA regulations for handling of foods and require-
ments for microbial testing during food manufacturing 
and storage,99 there should be minimal risk of exposure 
to foodborne pathogens. However, variation in quali-
ty-control testing practices or inadequate testing con-
ducted by a manufacturer of a raw food may allow for 
introduction of pathogens into pet-owning households. 
Although the FDA has provided a safety guidance doc-
ument for the manufacturers of RMBDs, manufacturers 
are not legally required to comply with these guidelines 
if an alternative approach meets applicable statutes and 
regulations.99
In contrast, home-prepared RMBDs rely heavily 
on each particular recipe or feeding program as well as 
the pet owner’s interpretation of and compliance with 
published recommendations, understanding of nutri-
ent requirements for dogs and cats, and understanding 
of the nutritional value of individual ingredients. On 
the basis of published diet reviews,41,43–46 most home-
prepared diets (both raw and cooked) are deﬁcient in 1 
or more essential fatty acids, vitamins, or minerals or a 
combination thereof. Although the perceived beneﬁts of 
home-prepared diets may be reinforced daily to owners 
through a pet’s appetite or coat quality, nutrient deﬁcien-
cies and excesses in adult animals are insidious and can 
lead to long-term complications if not detected and cor-
rected. In young growing animals and pregnant or lactat-
ing animals, nutrient deﬁciencies and excesses can cause 
severe and sometimes life-threatening complications. 
Additional studies are needed to provide information 
that will allow a better understanding of the long-term 
health effects of RMBDs for dogs and cats. In the absence 
of reported studies, an animal eating a home-prepared 
diet (raw or cooked) should undergo an annual physical 
examination and health screening, which should include 
serum biochemical analysis (with thyroxine concentra-
tions), hematologic analysis, and urinalysis. Results of 
routine hematologic analysis and urinalysis will provide 
veterinary practitioners with a general overview of an 
animal’s health status, but they will not enable practitio-
ners to identify speciﬁc nutrient deﬁciencies or excesses. 
Thus, owners should be cautioned that nutritionally re-
lated disease can mimic other forms of chronic illness. A 
complete diet history (including all foods, treats, table 
foods, supplement-type products, and foods used to ad-
minister medications) should be obtained from owners 
at each visit to be able to assess their pet, accurately in-
terpret the results of laboratory tests, and make appro-
priate recommendations.100,101 Even when the primary 
food fed to a pet is not raw, other components of the 
diet (eg, pet treats such as pig ears, rawhides, or bully 
sticks; foods intended for human consumption; or foods 
used to administer medications) may be raw and carry 
the same inherent risks.
Owners that elect to feed a commercial or home-
prepared RMBD should be counseled on the risks to 
themselves and their pets as a result of this feeding 
strategy, and the conversation should be documented 
in the medical record. For commercial foods (regard-
less of whether they are raw, dry extruded, or moist), it 
is important to be aware that there is wide variation in 
quality-control standards among manufacturers of raw 
or cooked commercial pet foods. Recommendations 
for selection of a commercial pet food have been sum-
marized (Appendix). Unfortunately, the necessary in-
formation may not be apparent from reading a label or 
advertisements. However, asking manufacturers about 
these topics can be enlightening and useful for selecting 
a food that is of high quality and not just the one with 
the best marketing. For home-prepared diets (whether 
raw or cooked), the authors also strongly recommend 
consulting with a board-certiﬁed veterinary nutritionist 
to ensure that the owners are using a safe and nutrition-
ally balanced recipe. Additional resources, including a 
list of board-certiﬁed veterinary nutritionists, can be 
found on the website of the American College of Vet-
erinary Nutrition.b 
Brought to you by Fox Valley Technical College  | Unauthenticated | Downloaded 07/12/26 03:39 AM UTC
1556 
Vet Med Today: Timely Topics in Nutrition 
JAVMA, Vol 243, No. 11, December 1, 2013
a. 
Wynn SG, Bartges JW, Dodd WJ. Routine laboratory parameters 
in healthy dogs fed raw food diets (abstr), in Proceedings. Am 
Acad Vet Nutr Clin Nutr Res Symp 2003;10.
b. 
American College of Veterinary Nutrition website. Available at: 
www.acvn.org. Accessed Aug 11, 2013.
References
1. 
American Animal Hospital Association website. Raw protein 
diet position statement. Available at: www.aahanet.org/Library/
Raw_Food_Diet.aspx. Accessed Aug 11, 2013.
2. 
AVMA website. Raw or undercooked animal-source protein in 
cat and dog diets. Available at: www.avma.org/KB/Policies/Pages/
Raw-or-Undercooked-Animal-Source-Protein-in-Cat-and-Dog-
Diets.aspx. Accessed Aug 11, 2013.
3. 
Canadian Veterinary Medical Association website. CVMA poli-
cy on raw or undercooked animal-source protein in cat and dog 
diets. Available at: www.cvma.net/doc.asp?id=21753. Accessed 
Aug 11, 2013.
4. 
Pet Partners website. Raw protein diet policy. Available at: www.
petpartners.org/rawdiet. Accessed Aug 11, 2013.
5. 
Schlesinger DP, Joffe DJ. Raw food diets in companion animals: 
a critical review. Can Vet J 2011;52:50–54.
6. 
Strohmeyer RA, Morley PS, Hyatt DR, et al. Evaluation of bac-
terial and protozoal contamination of commercially available 
raw meat diets for dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2006;228:537–
542.
7. 
Billinghurst I. Give your dog a bone: the practical commonsense 
way to feed dogs for a long healthy life. Alexandria, NSW, Austra-
lia: Bridge Printery Ian Billinghurst, 1993.
8. 
Schultze KR, ed. Natural nutrition for dogs and cats: the ultimate 
diet. Carlsbad, Calif: Hay House Inc, 1998.
9. 
Volhard W, Brown KL. The holistic guide for a healthy dog. New 
York: Howell Book House, 1995.
10. Pitout JD, Reisbig MD, Mulvey M, et al. Association between 
handling of pet treats and infection with Salmonella enterica se-
rotype Newport expressing the AmpC beta-lactamase, CMY-2.  
J Clin Microbiol 2003;41:4578–4582.
11. Clark C, Cunningham J, Ahmed R, et al. Characterization of 
Salmonella associated with pig ear dog treats in Canada. J Clin 
Microbiol 2001;39:3962–3968.
12. White DG, Datta A, McDermott P, et al. Antimicrobial sus-
ceptibility and genetic relatedness of Salmonella serovars iso-
lated from animal-derived dog treats in the USA. J Antimicrobial  
Chemother 2003;52:860–863.
13. Finley R, Reid-Smith R, Ribble C, et al. The occurrence and 
antimicrobial sensitivity of salmonellae isolated from com-
mercially available pig ear pet treats. Zoonoses Public Health 
2008;55:455–461.
14. Freeman LM, Janecko N, Weese JS. Nutritional and microbial 
analysis of bully sticks and survey of opinions about pet treats. 
Can Vet J 2013;54:50–54.
15. de-Oliveira LD, Carcioﬁ AC, Oliveira MC, et al. Effects of six 
carbohydrate sources on diet digestibility and postprandial 
glucose and insulin response in cats. J Anim Sci 2008;86:2237–
2246.
16. Hazewinkel H, Vandenbrom W, Vantklooster A, et al. Calcium 
metabolism in Great Dane dogs fed diets with various calcium 
and phosphorus levels. J Nutr 1991;121:S99–S106.
17. Meyer H, Zentek J, Habernoll H, et al. Digestibility and compat-
ibility of mixed diets and faecal consistency in different breeds 
of dog. Zentralbl Veterinarmed A 1999;46:155–165.
18.  Axelsson E, Ratnakumar A, Arendt M-L, et al. The genomic sig-
nature of dog domestication reveals adaptation to a starch-rich 
diet. Nature 2013;495;360–364. 
19. Association of American Feed Control Ofﬁcials. Ofﬁcial publica-
tion. Oxford, Ind: Association of American Feed Control Ofﬁ-
cials, 2012.
20. Nestle M, Nesheim M. Feed your pet right: the authoritative guide 
to feeding your dog and cat. New York: Free Press, 2010.
21. FDA website. Pet food recall products list. Available at: www.fda.
gov/AnimalVeterinary/SafetyHealth/RecallsWithdrawals/default.
htm. Accessed Aug 11, 2013.
22. FDA website. Recalls, market withdrawals, & safety alerts. 
Available at: www.fda.gov/safety/recalls/default.htm. Accessed 
Aug 11, 2013.
23. Steel RJS. Thiamine deﬁciency in a cat associated with the 
preservation of “pet meat” with sulphur dioxide. Aust Vet J 
1997;75:719–721.
24. Boermans HJ, Leung MCK. Mycotoxins and the pet food indus-
try: toxicological evidence and risk assessment. Int J Food Micro-
biol 2007;119:95–102.
25. Morita T, Awakura T, Shimada A, et al. Vitamin-D toxicosis in 
cats: natural outbreak and experimental study. J Vet Med Sci 
1995;57:831–837.
26. Bernard MT. Raising cats naturally: how to care for your cat the 
way nature intended. Sandy, Utah: Aardvark Global Pub, 2004.
27. Dijcker JC, Hagen-Plantinga A, Everts H, et al. Dietary and ani-
mal-related factors associate with the rate of urinary oxalate and 
calcium excretion in dogs and cats. Vet Rec 2012;171:46. 
28. Crissey SD, Swanson JA, Lintzenich BA, et al. Use of a raw meat-
based diet or a dry kibble diet for sand cats (Felis margarita).  
J Anim Sci 1997;75:2154–2160.
29. Vester BM, Burke SL, Liu KJ, et al. Inﬂuence of feeding raw 
or extruded feline diets on nutrient digestibility and nitro-
gen metabolism of African wildcats (Felis lybica). Zoo Biol 
2010;29:676–686.
30. Kerr KR, Vester Boler BM, Morris CL, et al. Apparent total 
tract energy and macronutrient digestibility and fecal fermen-
tative end-product concentrations of domestic cats fed ex-
truded, raw beef-based, and cooked beef-based diets. J Anim Sci 
2012;90:515–522.
31. Hendriks WH, Emmens MM, Trass B, et al. Heat processing 
changes the protein quality of canned cat foods as measured by 
a rat bioassay. J Anim Sci 1999;77:669–676.
32. Williams PA, Hodgkinson SM, Rutherfurd SM, et al. Lysine 
content in canine diets can be severely heat damaged. J Nutr 
2006;136:1998S–2000S.
33. Rutherfurd SM, Rutherfurd-Markwick KJ, Moughan PJ. Avail-
able (ileal digestible reactive) lysine in selected pet foods. J Agric 
Food Chem 2007;55:3517–3522.
34. Meade SJ, Reid EA, Gerrard JA. The impact of processing on 
the nutritional quality of food proteins. JAOAC 2005;88:904–
922.
35. Friedman M. Food browning and its prevention: an overview.  
J Agric Food Chem 1996;44:631–653.
36. Damodaran S. Amino acids, peptides and proteins. In: Fennema 
OR, ed. Food chemistry. 3rd ed. New York: Marcel Dekker Inc, 
1996;321–429.
37. National Research Council Ad Hoc Committee on Dogs and 
Cats. In: Nutrient requirements of dogs and cats. Washington, DC: 
National Academies Press, 2006.
38. Larsson SC, Wolk A. Meat consumption and risk of colorec-
tal cancer: a meta-analysis of prospective studies. Intl J Cancer 
2006;119:2657–2664.
39. Sugimura T, Wakabayashi K, Nakagama H, et al. Heterocyclic 
amines: mutagens/carcinogens produced during cooking of 
meat and ﬁsh. Cancer Sci 2004;95:290–299.
40. Knize MG, Salmon CP, Felton JS. Mutagenic activity and het-
erocyclic amine carcinogens in commercial pet foods. Mutat Res 
2003;539:195–201.
41. Freeman LM, Michel KE. Evaluation of raw food diets (Erratum 
published in J Am Vet Med Assoc 2001;218:1716). J Am Vet Med 
Assoc 2001;218:705–709.
42. Taylor MB, Geiger DA, Saker KE, et al. Diffuse osteopenia and 
myelopathy in a puppy fed a diet composed of an organic pre-
mix and raw ground beef. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2009;234:1041–
1048.
43. Dillitzer N, Becker N, Kienzle E. Intake of minerals, trace ele-
ments and vitamins in bone and raw food rations in adults dogs. 
Br J Nutr 2011;106:S53–S56.
44. Larsen JA, Parks EM, Heinze CR, et al. Evaluation of recipes 
for home-prepared diets for dogs and cats with chronic kidney 
disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2012;240:532–538.
45. Heinze CR, Gomez FC, Freeman LM. Assessment of commer-
cial diets and recipes for home-prepared diets recommended for 
dogs with cancer. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2012;241:1453–1460.
Brought to you by Fox Valley Technical College  | Unauthenticated | Downloaded 07/12/26 03:39 AM UTC
JAVMA, Vol 243, No. 11, December 1, 2013 
Vet Med Today: Timely Topics in Nutrition 
1557
46.  Stockman J, Fascetti AJ, Kass PH, et al. Evaluation of recipes of 
home-prepared maintenance diets for dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 
2013;242:1500–1505.
47. KuKanich KS. Update on Salmonella spp contamination of pet 
food, treats, and nutritional products and safe feeding recom-
mendations. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2011;238:1430–1434.
48. LeJeune JT, Hancock DD. Public health concerns associ-
ated with feeding raw meat diets to dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 
2001;219:1222–1225.
49. Joffe DJ, Schlesinger DP. Preliminary assessment of the risk of 
Salmonella infection in dogs fed raw chicken diets. Can Vet J 
2002;43:441–442.
50. Weese JS, Rousseau J, Arroyo L. Bacteriological evaluation of 
commercial canine and feline raw diets. Can Vet J 2005;46:513–
516.
51. Finley R, Reid-Smith R, Ribble C, et al. The occurrence and an-
timicrobial susceptibility of Salmonellae isolated from commer-
cially available canine raw food diets in three Canadian cities. 
Zoonoses Public Health 2008;55:462–469.
52. Lenz J, Joffe D, Kauffman M, et al. Perceptions, practices, and 
consequences associated with foodborne pathogens and the 
feeding of raw meat to dogs. Can Vet J 2009;50:637–643.
53. Selmi M, Stefanelli S, Bilei S, et al. Contaminated commer-
cial dehydrated food as source of multiple Salmonella sero-
types outbreak in a municipal kennel in Tuscany. Vet Italiana 
2011;47:183–190.
54. Behravesh CB, Ferraro A, Deasy M, et al. Human Salmonella 
infections linked to contaminated dry dog and cat food, 2006–
2008. Pediatrics 2010;126:477–483.
55. Chengappa MM, Staats J, Oberst RD, et al. Prevalence of Salmo-
nella in raw meat used in diets of racing Greyhounds. J Vet Diagn 
Invest 1993;5:372–377.
56. Stiver SL, Frazier KS, Mauel MJ, et al. Septicemic salmonel-
losis in two cats fed a raw-meat diet. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 
2003;39:538–542.
57. Leonard EK, Pearl DL, Finley RL, et al. Evaluation of pet-related 
management factors and the risk of Salmonella spp. carriage in 
pet dogs from volunteer households in Ontario (2005–2006). 
Zoonoses Public Health 2011;58:140–149.
58. Morley PS, Strohmeyer RA, Tankson JD, et al. Evaluation of the 
association between feeding raw meat and Salmonella enterica 
infections at a Greyhound breeding facility. J Am Vet Med Assoc 
2006;228:1524–1532. 
59. Cui S, Ge B, Zheng J, et al. Prevalence and antimicrobial resis-
tance of Campylobacter spp and Salmonella serovars in organic 
chicken from Maryland retail stores. Appl Environ Microbiol 
2005;71:4108–4111.
60. Bohaychuk VM, Gensler GE, King RK, et al. Occurrence of 
pathogens in raw and ready-to-eat meat and poultry products 
collected from the retail marketplace in Edmonton, Alberta, 
Canada. J Food Prot 2006;69:2176–2182.
61. M’ikanatha NM, Sandt CH, Localio AR, et al. Multidrug-resis-
tant Salmonella isolates from retail chicken meat compared with 
human clinical isolates. Foodborne Pathog Dis 2010;7:929–934.
62. Lestari SI, Han F, Wang F, et al. Prevalence and antimicrobial resis-
tance of Salmonella serovars in conventional and organic chicken 
from Louisiana retail stores. J Food Prot 2009;72:1165–1172.
63. Cook A, Odumeru J, Lee S, et al. Campylobacter, Salmonella, 
Listeria monocytogenes, verotoxigenic Escherichia coli, and Esch-
erichia coli prevalence, enumeration, and subtypes on retail 
chicken breasts with and without skin. J Food Prot 2012;75:34–
40.
64. Zhao T, Foyle MP, Fedorka-Cray PJ, et al. Occurrence of Salmo-
nella enterica serotype Typhimurium DT104A in retail ground 
beef. J Food Prot 2002;65:403–407.
65. Mollenkopf DF, Kleinhenz KE, Funk JA, et al. Salmonella en-
terica and Escherichia coli harboring blaCMY in retail beef and 
pork products. Foodborne Pathog Dis 2011;8:333–336.
66. Smielewska-Los E, Rypula K, Pacon J. The inﬂuence of feeding 
and maintenance system on the occurrence of Toxoplasma gondii 
infections in dogs. Pol J Vet Sci 2002;5:231–234. 
67. Lopes AP, Cardoso L, Rodrigues M. Serological survey of Toxo-
plasma gondii infection in domestic cats from northeastern Por-
tugal. Vet Parasitol 2008;155:184–189. 
68. Dubey JP, Hill DE, Jones JL, et al. Prevalence of viable Toxo-
plasma gondii in beef, chicken, and pork from retail meat stores 
in the United States: risk assessment to consumers. J Parasitol 
2005;91:1082–1093.
69. Antolova D, Reiterova K Miterpakova M, et al. The ﬁrst ﬁnd-
ing of Echinococcus multilocularis in dogs in Slovakia: an emerg-
ing risk for spreading of infection. Zoonoses Public Health 
2009;56:53–58. 
70. Pao S, Ettinger MR. Comparison of the microbial quality of 
ground beef and ground beef patties from Internet and local re-
tail markets. J Food Prot 2009;72:1722–1726.
71. Rumbeiha W, Morrison J. A review of class I and class II pet food 
recalls involving chemical contaminants from 1996 to 2008.  
J Med Toxicol 2011;7:60–66.
72. FDA website. FDA Amendments Act (FDAAA) of 2007. 
Available at: www.fda.gov/regulatoryinformation/legislation/ 
federalfooddrugandcosmeticactfdcact/signiﬁcantamendments 
tothefdcact/foodanddrugadministrationamendmentsactof2007/
default.htm. Accessed Aug 11, 2013.
73. LaFlamme DP, Abood SK, Fascetti AJ, et al. Pet feeding practices 
of dog and cat owners in the United States and Australia. J Am 
Vet Med Assoc 2008;232:687–694.
74.  Michel KE, Freeman L. Nutritional requirements across the 
species. In: Rolandelli RH, Bankhead R, Boullata JI, et al, eds. 
Clinical nutrition: enteral and tube feeding. 4th ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier Saunders, 2005;43–54.
75.  Dressman JB. Comparison of canine and human gastrointestinal 
physiology. Pharm Res 1986;3:123–131.
76.  Aymerich T, Picouet PA, Monfort JM. Decontamination tech-
nologies for meat products. Meat Sci 2008;78:114–129.
77.  Baert L, Debevere J, Uyttendaele M. The efﬁcacy of preservation 
methods to inactivate foodborne viruses. Intl J Food Microbiol 
2009;131:83–94.
78.  Vanlint D, Rutten N, Michiels CW, et al. Emergence and stability 
of high-pressure resistance in different food-borne pathogens. 
Appl Environ Microbiol 2012;78:3234–3241.
79. Rousseau A, Prittie J, Broussard JD, et al. Incidence and char-
acterization of esophagitis following esophageal foreign body 
removal in dogs: 60 cases (1999–2003). J Vet Emerg Crit Care 
2007;17:159–163.
80. Gianella P, Pfammatter NS, Burgener IA. Oesophageal and gas-
tric endoscopic foreign body removal: complications and follow 
up of 102 dogs. J Small Anim Pract 2009;50:649–654. 
81. Frowde PE, Battersby IA, Whitley NT, et al. Oesophageal dis-
ease in 33 cats. J Feline Med Surg 2011;13:564–596.
82. Thompson HC, Cortes Y, Gannon K, et al. Esophageal foreign 
bodies in dogs: 34 cases (2004–2009). J Vet Emerg Crit Care 
2012;22:253–261.
83. Köhler B, Stengel C, Neiger-Casas R. Dietary hyperthyroidism 
in dogs. J Small Anim Pract 2012;53:182–184.
84. Thibodeau A, Fravalo P, Laurent-Lewandowski L, et al. Pres-
ence and characterization of Campylobacter jejuni in organically 
raised chicken in Quebec. Can J Vet Res 2011;75:298–307.
85. Finley R, Reid-Smith R, Weese JS. Human health implications 
of Salmonella-contaminated natural pet treats and raw pet food. 
Clin Infect Dis 2006;42:686–691.
86. Aspinall TV, Marlee D, Hyde JE, et al. Prevalence of Toxoplasma 
gondii in commercial meat products as monitored by polymerase 
chain reaction—food for thought? Int J Parasitol 2002;32:1193–
1199.
87. Dorny P, Praet N, Deckers N, et al. Emerging food-borne para-
sites. Vet Parasitol 2009;163:196–206.
88. Dubey JP, Rajendran C, Ferreira LR, et al. High prevalence and 
genotypes of Toxoplasma gondii isolated from goats from a re-
tail meat store, destined for human consumption in the United 
States. Int J Parasitol 2011;41:827–833.
89. Callaway TR, Edrington TS, Anderson RC, et al. Gastrointesti-
nal microbial ecology and the safety of our food supply as re-
lated to Salmonella. J Anim Sci 2008;86:E163–E172.
90. Sato Y, Mori T, Koyama T, et al. Salmonella virchow infection 
in an infant transmitted by household dogs. J Vet Med Sci 
2000;62:767–769.
91. Lefebvre SL, Reid-Smith R, Boerlin P, et al. Evaluation of the 
risk of shedding salmonellae and other potential pathogens by 
Brought to you by Fox Valley Technical College  | Unauthenticated | Downloaded 07/12/26 03:39 AM UTC
1558 
Vet Med Today: Timely Topics in Nutrition 
JAVMA, Vol 243, No. 11, December 1, 2013
therapy dogs fed raw diets in Ontario and Alberta. Zoonoses Pub-
lic Health 2008;55:470–480.
92. Finley R, Ribble C, Aramini J, et al. The risk of salmonellae 
shedding by dogs fed Salmonella-contaminated commercial raw 
food diets. Can Vet J 2007;48:69–75.
93. Fredricksson-Ahomaa M, Korte T, Korkeala H. Transmission of 
Yersinia enterocolitica 4/O:3 to pets via contaminated pork. Lett 
Appl Microbiol 2001;32:375–378.
94. Jones JL, Kruszon-Moran D, Wilson M, et al. Toxoplasma gondii 
infection in the United States: seroprevalence and risk factors. 
Am J Epidemiol 2001;154:357–365.
95. Jokelainen P, Simola O, Rantanen E, et al. Feline toxoplasmosis 
in Finland: cross-sectional epidemiological study and case se-
ries study. J Vet Diagn Invest 2012;24:1115–1124.
96. Opsteegh M, Haveman R, Swart AN, et al. Seroprevalence and 
risk factors for Toxoplasma gondii infection in domestic cats in 
The Netherlands. Prev Vet Med 2012;104:317–326.
97. Babcock S, Marsh AE, Lin J, et al. Legal implications of zoonoses 
for clinical veterinarians. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008;233:1556–
1562.
98. Weese JS, Rousseau J. Survival of Salmonella Copenhagen in 
food bowls following contamination with experimentally in-
oculated raw meat: effects of time, cleaning, and disinfection. 
Can Vet J 2006;47:887–889. 
99. FDA Center for Veterinary Medicine website. Guidance for 
industry #122. Manufacture and labeling of raw meat foods 
for companion and captive noncompanion carnivores and 
omnivores. Available at: www.fda.gov/downloads/animalvet-
erinary/guidancecomplianceenforcement/guidanceforindustry/
ucm052662.pdf. Accessed Aug 11, 2013.
100. Baldwin K, Bartges J, Bufﬁngton T, et al. AAHA nutritional as-
sessment guidelines for dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 
2010:46:285–296.
101. WSAVA Nutritional Assessment Guidelines Taskforce Members, 
Freeman L, Becvarova I, Cave N, et al. WSAVA Nutritional As-
sessment Guidelines. J Small Anim Pract 2011;52:385–396.
Appendix
Recommendations for selecting a commercially available pet food. 
1. The manufacturer should employ at least 1 full-time qualiﬁed nutritionist. Appropriate qualiﬁcations are a PhD in animal nutrition or board-
certiﬁcation by the American College of Veterinary Nutrition or European College of Veterinary Comparative Nutrition. 
2. The manufacturer should test its diets with AAFCO feeding trials. If AAFCO feeding trials are not conducted, the manufacturer should, at a 
minimum, ensure that diets meet AAFCO nutrient proﬁles through analysis of the ﬁnished product.
3. The manufacturer should own the plant or plants where the food is manufactured.
4. The manufacturer should practice strict quality-control measures. Examples include certiﬁcation of a manufacturer’s procedures (eg, Global 
Food Safety Initiative, Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points, or American Feeding Industry Association); testing ingredients and end-
products for nutrient content, pathogens, and aﬂatoxins; materials risk assessments; and supplier audits.
5. The manufacturer should be able to provide a complete nutrient analysis for any dog or cat food of interest (not only the guaranteed analysis, 
which is listed on the label, but the average [typical] analysis as well). The manufacturer should be able to provide exact values for all 
nutrients. This should ideally be provided on an energy basis (ie, grams per 100 kilocalories or grams per 1,000 kilocalories), rather than on an 
as-fed or dry-matter basis, which does not account for the variation in energy density among foods.
6. The manufacturer should be able to provide the number of calories for any food on any requested weight or volume basis (eg, per gram, per 
pound, per cup, or per liter).
7. The manufacturer should conduct and publish research in peer-reviewed journals.
Recommendations are on the basis of information included in the nutritional assessment guidelines published by the American Animal Hospital 
Association100 and the World Small Animal Veterinary Association.101 
Brought to you by Fox Valley Technical College  | Unauthenticated | Downloaded 07/12/26 03:39 AM UTC
